Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalvaru ... vs State Of Kerala And Anr

Supreme Court of India
 Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalvaru ... vs State Of Kerala And Anr on 24 April, 1973

Equivalent citations: AIR 1973 SUPREME COURT 1461, 1973 4 SCC 225

Bench: S.M. Sikri, A.N. Grover, A.N. Ray, D.G. Palekar, H.R. Khanna, J.M. Shelat, K.K. Mathew, K.S. Hegde, M.H. Beg, P. Jaganmohan Reddy, S.N. Dwivedi, Y.V.Chandrachud

 CASE NO.:
Writ Petition (civil) 135 of 1970

PETITIONER:
Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalvaru and Ors

RESPONDENT:
State of Kerala and Anr

DATE OF JUDGMENT: 24/04/1973

BENCH:
S.M. Sikri & A.N. Grover & A.N. Ray & D.G. Palekar & H.R. Khanna & J.M. Shelat & K.K. Mathew & K.S. Hegde & M.H. Beg & P. Jaganmohan Reddy & S.N. Dwivedi & Y.V.Chandrachud

JUDGMENT:
JUDGMENT

W.P.(C) 135 OF 1970 
Appellants: His Holiness Kesavananda Bharati Sripadagalvaru and Ors. 
Vs. 
Respondent: State of Kerala and Anr.

Decided On: 24.04.1973

Hon'ble Judges: 
S.M. Sikri, C.J., A.N. Grover, A.N. Ray, D.G. Palekar, H.R. Khanna, J.M. Shelat, K.K. 
Mathew, K.S. Hegde M.H. Beg, P. Jaganmohan Reddy, S.N. Dwivedi and Y.V. 
Chandrachud, JJ.

JUDGMENT

S.M. Sikri, C.J.

1. I propose to divide my judgment into eight parts. Part I will deal with Introduction; 
Part II with interpretation of Golakhnath case; Part III with the interpretation of the 
original Article 368, as it existed prior to its amendment; Part IV with the validity of the 
Constitution (Twenty-fourth Amendment) Act; Part V with the validity of Section 2 of 
the Constitution (Twenty-fifth Amendment) Act; Part VI with the validity of Section 3 of 
the Constitution (Twenty-fifth Amendment) Act; Part VII with Constitution (Twenty-
ninth Amendment) Act; and Part VIII with conclusions.

PART I-Introduction

2. All the six writ petitions involve common questions as to the validity of the Twenty-
fourth, Twenty-fifth and Twenty-ninth Amendments of the Constitution. I may give a few 
facts in Writ petition No. 135 of 1970 to show how the question arises in this petition. 
Writ Petition No. 135 of 1970 was filed by the petitioner on March 21, 1970 under 
Article 32 of the Constitution for enforcement of his fundamental rights under Articles 
25, 26, 14, 19(1)(f) and 31 of the Constitution. He prayed that the provisions of the 
Kerala Land Reforms Act, 1963 (Act 1 of 1964) as amended by the Kerala Land Reforms 
(Amendment) Act 1969 (Act 35 of 1969) be declared unConstitutional, ultra vires and 
void. He further prayed for an appropriate writ or order to issue during the pendency of 
the petition. This Court issued rule nisi on March 25, 1970.
3. During the pendency of the writ petition, the Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act 
1971 (Kerala Act No. 25 of 1971) was passed which received the assent of the President 
on August 7, 1971. The petitioner filed an application for permission to urge additional 
grounds and to impugn the Constitutional validity of the Kerala Land Reforms 
(Amendment) Act 1971 (Kerala Act No. 25 of 1971).
4. In the meantime, the Supreme Court by its judgment dated April 26, 1971 in 
Kunjukutty Sahib v. State of Kerala [1972] S.C.C. 364 (Civil Appeals Nos. 143, 203-242, 
274 & 309 of 1971). Judgment dated April 26, 1971 upheld the majority judgment of the 
Kerala High Court in V.N. Narayanan Nair v. State of Kerala A.I.R. 1971 Kerala 98 
whereby certain, sections of the Act were struck down.
5. The Constitution (Twenty-fifth Amendment) Act came into force on November 5, 
1971, the Constitution (Twenty-fifth Amendment) Act came into force on April 20, 1972 
and the Constitution (Twenty-ninth Amendment) Act came into force on June 9, 1972. 
The effect of the Twenty-ninth Amendment of the Constitution was that it inserted the 
following Acts in the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution:
65. The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1969 (Kerala Act 35 of 
1969).
66. The Kerala Land Reforms (Amendment) Act, 1971 (Kerala Act 25 of 
1971).
6. The petitioner then moved an application for urging additional grounds and for 
amendment of the writ petition in order to challenge the above Constitutional 
amendments.
7. The Court allowed the application for urging additional grounds and for amendment of 
the writ petition on August 10, 1972 and issued notices to the Advocates-General to 
appear before this Court and take such part in the proceedings as they may be advised.
8. When the case was placed before the Constitutional bench, it referred this case to a 
larger bench to determine the validity of the impugned Constitutional amendments.
9. Similar orders were passed in the other writ petitions.
10. The larger bench was accordingly constituted. It was then felt that it would be 
necessary to decide whether I.C. Golak Nath v. State of Punjab [1967] 2 S.C.R. 762 was 
rightly decided or not. However, as I see it, the question whether Golak Nath's [1967] 2 
S.C.R. 762 case was rightly decided or not does not matter because the real issue is 
different and of much greater importance, the issue being : what is the extent of the 
amending power conferred by Article 368 of the Constitution, apart from Article 13(2), 
on Parliament ?
11. The respondents claim that Parliament can abrogate fundamental rights such as 
freedom of speech and expression, freedom to form associations or unions, and freedom 
of religion. They claim that democracy can even be replaced and one-party rule 
established. Indeed, short of repeal of the Constitution, any form of Government with no 
freedom to the citizens can be set up by Parliament by exercising its powers under Article 
368.
12. On the side of the petitioners it is urged that the power of Parliament is much more 
limited. The petitioners say that the Constitution gave the Indian citizen freedoms which 
were to subsist for ever and the Constitution was drafted to free the nation from any 
future tyranny of the representatives of the people. It is this freedom from tyranny which, 
according to the petitioners, has been taken away by the impugned Article 31C which has 
been inserted by the Twenty-fifth Amendment. If Article 31C is valid, they say, hereafter 
Parliament and State Legislatures and not the Constitution, will determine how much 
freedom is good for the citizens.
13. These cases raise grave issues. But however grave the issues may be, the answer must 
depend on the interpretation of the words in Article 368, read in accordance with the 
principles of interpretation which are applied to the interpretation of a Constitution given 
by the people to themselves.
14. I must interpret Article 368 in the setting of our Constitution, in the background of 
our history and in the light of our aspirations and hopes, and other relevant 
circumstances. No other Constitution in the world is like ours. No other Constitution 
combines under its wings such diverse peoples, numbering now more than 550 millions, 
with different languages and religions and in different stages of economic development, 
into one nation, and no other nation is faced with such vast socio-economic problems.
15. I need hardly observe that I am not interpreting an ordinary statute, but a Constitution 
which apart from setting up a machinery for government, has a noble and grand vision. 
The vision was put in words in the Preamble and carried out in part by conferring 
fundamental rights on the people. The vision was directed to be further carried out by the 
application of directive principles.
PART II-Interpretation of Golak Nath's Case.
16. Before proceeding with the main task, it is necessary to ask : what was decided in I.C. 
Golak Nath v. State of Punjab [1967] 2 S.C.R. 762 ? In order to properly appreciate that 
case, it is necessary first to have a look at Sri Sankari Prasad Singh Deo v. Union of India 
and State of Bihar [1952] S.C.R. 89 and Sajjan Singh v. State of Rajasthan [1965] 1 
S.C.R. 933.
17. The Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, which inserted inter alia Articles 31A 
and 31B in the Constitution was the subject matter of decision in Sankari Prasad's [1952] 
S.C.R. 89 case. The main arguments relevant to the present case which were advanced in 
support of the petition before this Court were summarised by Patanjali Sastri, J. as he 
then was, as follows:
First, the power of amending the Constitution provided for under Article 
368 was conferred not on Parliament but on the two Houses of Parliament 
as designated body and, therefore, the provisional Parliament was not 
competent to exercise that power under Article 379.
Fourthly, in any case Article 368 is a complete code in itself and does not 
provide for any amendment being made in the bill after it has been 
introduced in the House. The bill in the present case having been 
admittedly amended in several particulars during its passage through the 
House, the Amendment Act cannot be said to have been passed in 
conformity with the procedure prescribed in Article 368.
Fifthly, the Amendment Act, in so far as it purports to take away or 
abridge the rights conferred by Part III of the Constitution, falls within the 
prohibition of Article 13(2).
 X X X
18. As stated in the head note, this Court held:
The provisional Parliament is competent to exercise the power of 
amending the Constitution under Article 368. The fact that the said article 
refers to the two Houses of the Parliament and the President separately and 
not to the Parliament, does not lead to the inference that the body which is 
invested with the power to amend is not the Parliament but a different 
body consisting of the two Houses.
The words "all the powers conferred by the provisions of this Constitution 
on Parliament" in Article 379 are not confined to such powers as could be 
exercised by the provisional Parliament consisting of a single chamber, 
but are wide enough to include the power to amend the Constitution 
conferred by Article 368.
19. I may mention that Mr. Seervai contends that the conclusion just mentioned was 
wrong and that the body that amends the Constitution under Article 368 is not 
Parliament.
20. The Court further held:
The view that Article 368 is a complete code in itself in respect of the 
procedure provided by it and does not contemplate any amendment of a 
Bill for amendment of the Constitution after it has been introduced, and 
that if the Bill is amended during its passage through the House, the 
Amendment Act cannot be said to have been passed in conformity with 
the procedure prescribed by Article 368 and would be invalid, is 
erroneous.
Although "law" must ordinarily include Constitutional law there is a clear 
demarcation between ordinary law which is made in the exercise of 
legislative power and Constitutional law, which is made in the exercise of 
constituent power. In the context of Article 13, "law" must be taken to 
mean rules or regulations made in exercise of ordinary legislative power 
and not amendments to the Constitution made in the exercise of 
constituent power with the result that Article 13(2) does not affect 
amendments made under Article 368.
21. Although the decision in Sankari Prasad's [1952] S.C.R. 89 case was not challenged 
in Sajjan Singh's [1965] 1 S.C.R. 933 case, Gajendragadkar, C.J. thought it fit to give 
reasons for expressing full concurrence with that decision.
22. The only contention before the Court was that "since it appears that the powers 
prescribed by Article 226 are likely to be affected by the intended amendment of the 
provisions contained in Part III, the bill introduced for the purpose of making such an 
amendment, must attract the proviso, and as the impugned Act has admittedly not gone 
through the procedure prescribed by the proviso, it is invalid". According to 
Gajendragadkar, C.J. "that raised the question about the construction of the provisions 
contained in Article 368 and the relation between the substantive part of Article 368 with 
its proviso.
23. The Chief Justice came to the conclusion that "as a matter of construction, there is no 
escape from the conclusion that Article 368 provides for the amendment of the provisions 
contained in Part III without imposing on Parliament an obligation to adopt the procedure 
prescribed by the proviso.
24. The learned Chief Justice thought that the power to amend in the context was a very 
wide power and it could not be controlled' by the literal dictionary meaning of the word 
"amend". He expressed his agreement with the reasoning of Patanjali Sastri, J. regarding 
the applicability of Article 13(2) to Constitution Amendment Acts passed under Article 
368. He further held that when Article 368 confers on Parliament the right to amend the 
Constitution, it can be exercised over all the provisions of the Constitution. He thought 
that "if the Constitution-makers had intended that any future amendment of the 
provisions in regard to fundamental rights should be subject to Article 13(2), they would 
have taken the precaution of making a clear provision in that behalf.
25. He seemed to be in agreement with the following observations of Kania, C.J. in A.K. 
Gopalan v. The State of Madras [1950] S.C.R. 88 at p. 100:
the inclusion of Article 13(1) and (2) in the Constitution appears to be a 
matter of abundant caution. Even in their absence if any of the 
fundamental rights was infringed by any legislative enactment, the Court 
has always the power to declare the enactment, to the extent it transgresses 
the limits, invalid.
26. He was of the view that even though the relevant provisions of Part III can be justly 
described as the very foundation and the cornerstone of the democratic way of life 
ushered in this country by the Constitution, it cannot be said that the fundamental rights 
guaranteed to the citizens are eternal and inviolate in the sense that they can never be 
abridged or amended.
27. According to him, it was legitimate to assume that the Constitution-makers visualised 
that Parliament would be competent to make amendments in these rights so as to meet the 
challenge of the problems which may arise in the course of socio-economic progress and 
development of the country.
28. Hidayatullah, J., as he then was, agreed with the Chief Justice that the 17th 
Amendment was valid even though the procedure laid down in the proviso to Article 368 
had not been followed. But he expressed his difficulty in accepting the part of the 
reasoning in Sankari Prasad's [1952] S.C.R. 89 case.
29. He observed as follows:
It is true that there is no complete definition of the word "law"' in the 
article but it is significant that the definition does not seek to exclude 
Constitutional amendments which it would have been easy to indicate in 
the definition by adding "but shall not include an amendment of the 
Constitution".
30. He further observed:
The meaning of Article 13 thus depends on the sense in which the word 
"law" in Article 13(2) is to be understood. If an amendment can be said to 
fall within the term "law", the Fundamental Rights become "eternal and 
inviolate" to borrow the language of the Japanese Constitution. Article 13 
is then on par with Article 5 of the American Federal Constitution in its 
immutable prohibition as long as it stands.
31. According to him "Our Preamble is more akin in nature to the American Declaration 
of Independence (July 4, 1776) then to the preamble to the Constittuion of the United 
States. It does not make any grant of power but it gives a direction and purpose to the 
Constitution which is reflected in Parts III and IV. Is it to be imagined that a two-thirds 
majority of the two Houses at any time is all that is necessary to alter it without even 
consulting the States ? It is not even included in the proviso to Article 368 and it is 
difficult to think that as it has not the protection of the proviso it must be within the main 
part of Article 368.
32. He further observed:
I would require stronger reason than those given in Sankari Prasad's case 
to make me accept the view that Fundamental Rights were not really 
fundamental but were intended to be within the powers of amendment in 
common with the other parts of the Constitution and without the 
concurrence of the States.
33. He held:
What Article 368 does is to lay down the manner of amendment and the 
necessary conditions for the effectiveness of the amendment....
The Constitution gives so many assurances in Part III that it would be 
difficult to think that they were the play-things of a special majority. To 
hold this would mean prima facie that the most solemn parts of our 
Constitution stand on the same footing as any other provision and even on 
a less firm ground than one on which the articles mentioned in the proviso 
stand.
34. Mudholkar, J. although agreeing that the writ petition should be dismissed, raised 
various doubts and he said that he was reserving his opinion on the question whether 
Sankari Prasad's case was rightly decided. He thought:
The language of Article 368 is plain enough to show that the action of 
Parliament in amending the Constitution is a legislative act like one in 
exercise of its normal legislative power. The only difference in respect of 
an amendment of the Constitution is that the Bill amending the 
Constitution has to be passed by a special majority (here I have in mind 
only those amedments which do not attract the proviso to Article 368). 
The result of a legislative action of a legislature cannot be other than 'law' 
and, therefore, it seems to me that the fact that the legislation deals with 
the amendment of a provision of the Constitution would not make its 
result any the less a 'law'.
35. He observed:
It is true that the Constitution does not directly prohibit the amendment of 
Part III. But it would indeed be strange that rights which are considered to 
be fundamental and which include one which is guaranteed by the 
Constitution (vide Article 32) should be more easily capable of being 
abridged or restricted than any of the matters referred to in the proviso to 
Article 368 some of which are perhaps less vital than fundamental rights. 
It is possible, as suggested by my learned brother, that Article 368 merely 
lays down the procedure to be followed for amending the Constitution and 
does not confer a power to amend the Constitution which, I think, has to 
be ascertained from the provision sought to be amended or other relevant 
provisions or the preamble.
36. Later, he observed:
Above all, it formulated a solemn and dignified preamble which appears to 
be an epitome of the basic features of the Constitution. Can it not be said 
that these are indica of the intention of the Constituent Assembly to give a 
permanency to the basic features of the Constitution ?
37. He posed a further question by observing:
It is also a matter for consideration whether making a change in a basic 
feature of the Constitution can be regarded merely as an amendment or 
would it be, in effect, rewriting a part of the Constitution; and if the latter, 
would it be within the purview of Article 368 ?
38. He then stressed the prime importance of the preamble:
The Constitution indicates three modes of amendments and assuming that 
the provisions of Article 368 confer power on Parliament to amend the 
Constitution, it will still have to be considered whether as long as the 
preamble stands unamended, that power can be exercised with respect to 
any of the basic features of the Constitution.
To illustrate my point, as long as the words 'sovereign democratic 
republic' are there, could the Constitution be amended so as to depart from 
the democratic form of Government or its republic character? If that 
cannot be done, then, as long as the words "Justice, social, economic and 
political etc.," are there could any of the rights enumerated in Articles 14 
to 19, 21, 25, 31 and 32 be taken away ? If they cannot, it will be for 
consideration whether they can be modified.
It has been said, no doubt, that the preamble is not a part of our 
Constitution. But, I think, that if upon a comparison of the preamble with 
the broad features of the Constitution it would appear that the preamble is 
an epitome of those features or, to put it differently if these features are an 
amplification or concretisation of the concepts set out in the preamble it 
may have to be considered whether the preamble is not a part of the 
Constitution. While considering this question it would be of relevance to 
bear in mind that the preamble is not of the common run such as is to be 
found in an Act of a legislature. It has the stamp of deep deliberation and 
is marked by precision. Would this not suggest that the framers of the 
Constitution attached special significance to it?
39. Coming now to Golak Nath's case, the petitioner had challenged the validity of the 
Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 1964 which included in the Ninth Schedule, 
among other acts, the Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act, 1953 (Act 10 of 1953), and 
the Mysore Land Reforms Act (Act 10 of 1962) as amended by Act 14 of 1965.
40. It was urged before the Court that Sankari Prasad's [1952] S.C.R. 89 case in which 
the validity of the Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951 and Sajjan Singh's [1965] 1 
S.C.R. 933 case in which the validity of the Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act 
was in question had been wrongly decided by this Court.
41. Subba Rao, C.J. speaking for himself and 4 other judges summarised the conclusions 
at page 815 as follows:
The aforesaid discussion leads to the following results:
(1) The power of the Parliament to amend the Constitution 
is derived from Articles 245, 246 and 248 of the 
Constitution and not from Article 368 thereof which only 
deals with procedure. Amendment is a legislative process.
(2) Amendment is 'law' within the meaning of Article 13 of 
the Constitution and, therefore, if it takes away or abridges 
the rights conferred by Part III thereof, it is void.
(3) The Constitution (First Amendment) Act, 1951, 
Constitution (Fourth Amendment) Act, 1955, and the 
Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 1964, abridge 
the scope of the fundamental rights. But, on the basis of 
earlier decisions of this Court, they were valid.
(4) On the application of the doctrine of 'prospective over-
ruling', as explained by us earlier, our decision will have 
only prospective operation and, therefore, the said 
amendments will continue to be valid.
(5) We declare that the Parliament will have no power from 
the date of this decision to amend any of the provisions of 
Part III of the Constitution so as to take away or abridge the 
fundamental rights enshrined therein.
(6) As the Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act 
holds the field, the validity of the two impugned Acts, 
namely, the Punjab Security of Land Tenures Act X of 
1953, and the Mysore Land Reforms Act X of 1962, as 
amended by Act XIV of 1965, cannot be questioned on the 
ground that they offend Articles 13, 14 or 31 of the 
Constitution.
42. It must be borne in mind that these conclusions were given in the light of the 
Constitution as it stood then i.e. while Article 13(2) subsisted in the Constitution. It was 
then not necessary to decide the ambit of Article 368 with respect to the powers of 
Parliament to amend Article 13(2) or to amend Article 368 itself. It is these points that 
have now to be decided.
43. It may further be observed that the Chief Justice refused to express an opinion on the 
contention that, in exercise of the power of amendment, Parliament cannot destroy the 
fundamental structure of the Constitution but can only modify the provision thereof 
within the framework of the original instrument for its better effectuation.
44. As will be seen later, the first conclusion above, does not survive for discussion any 
longer because it is rightly admitted on behalf of the petitioners that the Constitution 
(Twenty Fourth Amendment) Act, 1971, in so far as it transfers power to amend the 
Constitution from the residuary entry (Entry 97 List 1) or Article 248 of the Constitution 
to Article 368, is valid; in other words Article 368 of the Constitution as now amended by 
the Twenty Fourth Amendment deals not only with the procedure for amendment but also 
confers express power on Parliament to amend the Constitution.
45. I will also not discuss the merits of the second conclusion as the same result follows 
in this case even if it be assumed in favour of the respondents that an amendment of the 
Constitution is not law within Article 13(2) of the Constitution.
46. Hidayatullah, J. as he then was, came to the following conclusions at page 902:
(i) that the Fundamental Rights are outside the amendatory process if the 
amendment seeks to abridge or take away any of the rights; 
(ii) that Sankari Prasad's case (and Sajjan Singh's case which followed it) 
conceded the power of amendment over Part III of the Constitution on an 
erroneous view of Articles 13(2) and 368.
(iii) that the First, Fourth and Seventh Amendments being part of the 
Constitution by acquiescence for a long time, cannot now be challenged 
and they contain authority for the seventeenth Amendment; 
(iv) that this Court having now laid down that Fundamental Rights cannot 
be abridged or taken away by the exercise of amendatory process in 
Article 368, any further inroad into these rights as they exist today will be 
illegal and unConstitutional unless it complies with Part III in general and 
Article 13(2) in particular; 
(v) that for abridging or taking away Fundamental Rights, a Constituent 
body will have to be convoked; and
(vi) that the two impugned Acts, namely, the Punjab Security of Land 
Tenures Act, 1,953 (X of 1953) and the Mysore Land Reforms Act, 1961 
(X of 1962) as amended by Act XIV of 1965 are valid under the 
Constitution not because they are included in Schedule 9 of the 
Constitution but because they are protected by Article 31-A, and the 
President's assent.
47. I am not giving his reasons for these conclusions here because they will be examined 
when dealing with the arguments addressed to us on various points.
48. Wanchoo, J. as he then was, also speaking on behalf of 2 other Judges held that 
Sankari Prasad's [1952] S.C.R. 89 case was correctly decided and the majority in Sajjan 
Singh's [1965] 1 S.C.R. 933 case was correct in following that decision.
49. Bachawat, J. held:
(1) Article 368 not only prescribes the procedure but also gives the power 
of amendment; 
(2) Article 368 gives the power of amending each and every provision of 
the Constitution and as Article 13(2) is a part of the Constitution it is 
within the reach of the amending power; 
(3) Article 368 is not controlled by Article 13(2) and the prohibitory 
injunction in Article 13(2) is not attracted against the amending power; 
(4) Constitutional amendment under Article 368 is not a law within the 
meaning of Article 13(2); 
(5) The scale of value embodied in Parts III and IV is not immortal. Parts 
III and IV being parts of the Constitution are not immune from 
amendment under Article 368. Constition-makers could not have intended 
that the rights conferred by Part III could not be altered by giving effect to 
the policies of Part IV.
(6) The Preamble cannot control the unambiguous language of the articles 
of the Constitution.
50. Regarding the amendment of the basic features of the Constitution, he observed:
Counsel said that they could not give an exhaustive catalogue of the basic 
features, but sovereignty, the republican form of government, the federal 
structure and the fundamental rights were some of the features. The 
Seventeenth Amendment has not derogated from the sovereignty, the 
republican form of government and the federal structure, and the question 
whether they can be touched by amendment does not arise for decision. 
For the purposes of these cases, it is sufficient to say that the fundamental 
rights are within the reach of the amending power.
51. Ramaswami, J., held:
(1) The amending power under Article 368 is sui generis; 
(2) "Law" in Article 13(2) cannot be construed so as to include "Law" 
made by Parliament under Articles 4, 169, 392, 5th Schedule Part D and 
6th Schedule Para 21.
(3) The expression "fundamental rights" does not lift the fundamental 
rights above the Constitution itself; 
(4) Both the power to amend and the procedure to amend are enacted in 
Article 368.
(5) There were no implied limitations on the amending power and all 
articles of the Constitution were amendable either under the proviso of 
Article 368 or under the main part of the article.
(6) The Federal structure is not an essential part of our Constitution.
(7) The power of amendment is in point of quality an adjunct of 
sovereignty. If so, it does not admit of any limitations.
52. In brief 6 Judges held that in view of Article 13(2) Fundamental Rights could not be 
abridged or taken away. Five Judges held that Article 13(2) was inapplicable to Acts 
amending the Constitution.
PART III-Interpretation of Article 368
53. Let me now proceed to interpret Article 368. Article 368, as originally enacted, read 
as follows:
An amendment of this Constitution may be initiated only by the 
introduction of a Bill for the purpose in either House of Parliament, and 
when the Bill is passed in each House by a majority of the total 
membership of that House and by a majority of not less than two-thirds of 
the members of that House present and voting, it shall be presented to the 
President for his assent and upon such assent being given to the Bill, the 
Constitution shall stand amended in accordance with the terms of the Bill:
Provided that if such amendment seeks to make any change in-
(a) Article 54, Article 55, Article 73, Article 162 or Article 
241, or
(b) Chapter IV of Part V, Chapter V of Part VI, or Chapter 
I of Part XI, or
(c) any of the Lists in the Seventh Schedule, or
(d) the representation of States in Parliament, or
(e) the provisions of this article,
the amendment shall also require to be ratified by the Legislatures of not 
less than one-half of the States specified in Parts A and B of the First 
Schedule by resolutions to that effect passed by those Legislatures before 
the Bill making provision for such amendment is presented to the 
President for assent.
54. It will be noticed that Article 368 is contained in a separate part and the heading is 
"Amendment of the Constitution", but the marginal note reads "Procedure for amendment 
of the Constitution".
55. The expression "amendment of the Constitution" is not defined or expanded in any 
manner, although in other parts of the Constitution, the word "Amend" or "Amendment" 
has, as will be pointed out later, been expanded. In some parts they have clearly a narrow 
meaning.. The proviso throws some light on the problem. First, it uses the expression "if 
such amendment seeks to make any change in"; it does not add the words "change of ", or 
omit "in", and say "seeks to change" instead of the expression "seeks to make any change 
in".
56. The articles which are included in the proviso may be now considered. Part V, 
Chapter I, deals with "the Executive". Article 52, provides that there shall be a President 
of India, and Article 53 vests the executive power of the Union in the President and 
provides how it shall be exercised. These two articles are not mentioned in the proviso to 
Article 368 but Articles 54 and 55 are mentioned.
57. Article 54 provides:
54. The President shall be elected by the members of an electoral college 
consisting of-
(a) the elected members of both Houses of Parliament; and
(b) the elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of 
the States.
58. Article 55 prescribes the manner of election of the President.
59. Why were Articles 52 and 53 not mentioned in the proviso to Article 368 if the 
intention was that the States would have a say as to the federal structure of the country? 
One of the inferences that can be drawn is that the Constitution-makers never 
contemplated, or imagined that Article 52 will be altered and there shall not be a 
President of India. In other words they did not contemplate a monarchy being set up in 
India or there being no President.
60. Another article which has been included in the proviso to Article 368 is Article 73 
which deals with the extent of executive powers of the Union. As far as the Vice-
President is concerned, the States have been given no say whether there shall be a Vice-
President or not; about the method of his election, etc. But what is remarkable is that 
when we come to Part VI of the Constitution, which deals with the "States", the only 
provision which is mentioned in the proviso to Article 368 is Article 162 which deals 
with the extent of executive power of States. The appointment of a Governor, conditions 
of service of a Governor, and the Constitution and functions of the Council of Ministers, 
and other provisions regarding the Ministers and the conduct of government business are 
not mentioned at all in the proviso to Article 368. Another article which is mentioned in 
Clause (a) of the proviso to Article 368 is Article 241 which originally dealt with High 
Courts for States in Part C of the First Schedule.
61. Chapter IV of Part V of the Constitution which deals with the Union Judiciary, and 
Chapter V of Part VI which deals with the High Courts in the State are included in the 
proviso to Article 368 but it is extra-ordinary that Chapter VI of Part VI which deals with 
subordinate Judiciary is not mentioned in Clause (b). Chapter I of Part XI is included and 
this deals with the Legislative Relations between the Union and the States, but Chapter II 
of Part XI which deals with Administrative Relations between the Union and the States, 
and various other matters in which the States would be interested are not included. 
Provisions relating to services under the State and Trade and Commerce are also not 
included in the proviso.
62. This analysis of the provisions contained in Clauses (a) and (b) of the proviso to 
Article 368 shows that the reason for including certain articles and excluding certain 
other from the proviso was not that all articles dealing with the federal structure or the 
status of the States had been selected for inclusion in the proviso.
63. Clause (c) of the proviso mentions the Lists in the Seventh Schedule, Clause (d) 
mentions the representation of States in Parliament, and Clause (e) the provisions of 
Article 368 itself. The provisions of Sub-clauses (c), (d) and (e) can rightly be said to 
involve the federal structure and the rights of the States.
64. What again is remarkable is that the fundamental rights are not included in the 
proviso at all. Were not the States interested in the fundamental rights of their people ? 
The omission may perhaps be understandable because of the express provision of Article 
13(2) which provided that States shall not make any law which takes away or abridges 
the rights conferred by Part III and any law made in contravention of this clause shall to 
the extent of the contravention be void, assuming for the present that Article 13(2) 
operates on Constitutional amendments.
65. In construing the expression "amendment of this Constitution I must look at the 
whole scheme of the Constitution. It is not right to construe words in vacuum and then 
insert the meaning into an article. Lord Greene observed in Bidie v. General Accident, 
Fire and Life Assurance Corporation [1948] 2 All E.R. 995, 998:
The first thing one has to do, I venture to think, in construing words in a 
section of an Act of Parliament is not to take those words in vacuo, so to 
speak, and attribute to them what is sometimes called their natural or 
ordinary meaning. Few words in the English language have a natural or 
ordinary meaning in the sense that they must be so read that their meaning 
is entirely independent of their context. The method of construing statutes 
that I prefer is not to take particular words and attribute to them a sort of 
prima facie meaning which you may have to displace or modify. It is to 
read the statute as a whole and ask oneself the question: "In this state, in 
this context, relating to this subject-matter, what is the true meaning of 
that word ?
66. I respectfully adopt the reasoning of Lord Greene in construing the expression "the 
amendment of the Constitution.
67. Lord Greene is not alone in this approach. In Bourne v. Norwich Crematorium [1967] 
2 All E.R. 576, 578 it is observed:
English words derive colour from those which surround them. Sentences 
are not mere collections of words to be taken out of the sentence defined 
separately by reference to the "dictionary or decided cases, and then put 
back again into the sentence with the meaning which you have assigned to 
them as separate words, so as to give the sentence or phrase a meaning 
which as a sentence or phrase it cannot bear without distortion of the 
English language.
68. Holmes, J. in Towne v. Eigner 245 U.S. 418; 425 : 62 L. ed. 372; 376 had the same 
thought. He observed:
A word is not crystal, transparent and unchanged; it is the skin of living 
thought and may vary greatly in colour and content according to the 
circumstances and the time in which it is used.
69. What Holmes J. said is particularly true of the word "Amendment" or "Amend".
70. I may also refer to the observation of Gwyer C.J. and Lord Wright:
A grant of the power in general terms, standing by itself, would no doubt 
be construed in the wider sense; but it may be qualified by other express 
provisions in the same enactment, by the implications of the context, and 
even by the considerations arising out of what appears to be the general 
scheme of the Act". (Per Gwyer C.J.-The Central Provinces and Berar Act, 
1939 F.C.R. 18 at 42.)
The question, then, is one of construction and in the ultimate resort must 
be determined upon tht actual words used, read not in vacuo but as 
occurring in a single complex instrument, in which one part may throw 
light on another. The Constitution has been described as the federal 
compact, and the construction must hold a balance between all its parts". 
(Per Lord Wright-James v. Commonwealth of Australia 1936 A.C. 578 at 
613).
71. In the Constitution the word "amendment" or "amend" has been used in various 
places to mean different things. In some articles, the word "amendment" in the context 
has a wide meaning and in another context it has a narrow meaning. In Article 107, which 
deals with legislative procedure, Clause (2) provides that "subject to the provisions of 
Articles 108 and 109, a Bill shall not be deemed to have been passed by the House of 
Parliament unless it has been agreed to by both Houses, either without amendment or 
with such amendments only as are agreed to by both Houses." It is quite clear that the 
word "amendment" in this article has a narrow meaning. Similarly, in Article 111 of the 
Constitution, whereby the President is enabled to send a message requesting the Houses 
to consider the desirability of introducing amendments, the "amendments" has a narrow 
meaning.
72. The opening of Article 4(1) reads:
4(1) Any law referred to in Article 2 or Article 3 shall contain such 
provisions for the amendment of the First Schedule and the Fourth 
Schedule as may be necessary to give effect to the provisions of the law....
Here the word "amendment" has a narrower meaning. "Law" under Articles 3 and 4 must 
"conform to the democratic pattern envisaged by the Constitution; and the power which 
the Parliament may exercise...is not the power to over-ride the Constitutional scheme. No 
state can, therefore, be formed, admitted or set up by law under Article 4 by the 
Parliament which has no effective legislative, executive and judicial organs". (Per Shah 
J.-Mangal Singh v. Union of India [1967] 2 S.C.R. 109 at 112.
(Emphasis supplied)
73. Article 169(2) reads:
Any law referred to in Clause (1) shall contain such provisions for the 
amendment of this Constitution as may be necessary to give effect to the 
provisions of the law and may also contain such supplemental, incidental 
and consequential provisions as Parliament may deem necessary.
Here also the word "amendment" has a narrow meaning.
74. Para 7 of Part D, Fifth Schedule, which deals with amendment of the schedule, reads:
7. Amendment of the Schedule.-(1) Parliament may from time to time by 
law amend by way of addition, variation or repeal any of the provisions of 
this Schedule and, when the Schedule is so amended, any reference to this 
Schedule in this Constitution shall be construed as a reference to such 
schedule as so amended.
Here the word "amend" has been expanded by using the expression "by way of addition, 
variation or repeal", but even here, it seems to me, the amendments will have to be in line 
with the whole Constitution. Similarly, under para 21 of the Sixth Schedule,. which 
repeats the phraseology of para 7 of the Fifth Schedule, it seems to me, the amendments 
will have to be in line with the Constitution.
75. I may mention that in the case of the amendments which may be made in exercise of 
the powers under Article 4, Article 169, para 7 of the Fifth Schedule, and para 21 of the 
Sixth Schedule, it has been expressly stated in these provisions that they shall not be 
deemed to be amendments of the Constitution for the purposes of Article 368.
76. It is also important to note that the Constituent Assembly which adopted Article 368 
on September 17, 1949, had earlier on August 18, 1949, substituted the following section 
in place of the old Section 291 in the Government of India Act, 1935:
291. Power of the Governor-General to amend certain provisions of the 
Act and orders made thereunder-
(1) The Governor-General may at any time by order make 
such amendments as he considers necessary whether by 
way of addition, modification or repeal, in the provisions of 
this Act or of any order made thereunder in relation to any 
Provincial Legislature with respect to any of the following 
matters, that is to say-
(a) the composition of the Chamber or 
Chambers of the Legislature; 
(b) the delimitation of territorial 
constituencies for the purpose of elections 
under this Act.
* * * * *
Here, the word "amendment" has been expanded. It may be that there really is no 
expansion because every amendment may involve addition, variation or repeal of part of 
a provision.
77. According to Mr. Seervai, the power of amendment given by Article 4, read with 
Articles 2 and 3, Article 169, Fifth Schedule and Sixth Schedule, is a limited power 
limited to certain provisions of the Constitution, while the power under Article 368 is not 
limited. It is true every provision is prima facie amendable under Article 368 but this 
does not solve the problem before us.
78. I may mention that an attempt was made to expand the word "amend" in Article 368 
by proposing an amendment that "by way of variation, addition, or repeal" be added but 
the amendment was rejected.
79. Again, in Article 196(2), the word "amendment" has been used in a limited sense. 
Article 196(2) reads:
196(2). Subject to the provisions of Articles 197 and 198, a Bill shall not 
be deemed to have been passed by the Houses of the Legislature of a State 
having a Legislative Council unless it has been agreed to by both Houses, 
either without amendment or with such amendments only as are agreed to 
by both Houses.
80. Similar meaning may be given to the word "amendment" in Article 197(2), which 
reads:
197(2). If after a Bill has been so passed for the second time by the 
Legislative Assembly and transmitted to the Legislative Council-
(a) the Bill is rejected by the Council; or
(b) more than one month elapses from the date on which 
the Bill is laid before the Council without the Bill being 
passed by it; or
(c) the Bill is passed by the Council with amendments to 
which the Legislative Assembly does not agree,
(c) the Bill is passed by the Legislative Assembly does not 
agree, the Bill shall be deemed to have been passed by the 
Houses of the Legislature of the State in the form in which 
it was passed by the Legislative Assembly for the second 
time with such amendments, if any, as have been made or 
suggested by the Legislative Council and agreed to by the 
Legislative Assembly.
81. Under Article 200 the Governor is enabled to suggest the desirability of introducing 
any such amendments as he may recommend in his message. Here again "amendment" 
has clearly a limited meaning.
82. In Article 35(b) the words used are:
Any law in force immediately before the commencement of this 
Constitution...subject to the terms thereof and to any adaptations and 
modifications that may be made therein under Article 372, continue in 
force until altered or repealed or amended by Parliament.
83. Here, all the three words are used giving a comprehensive meaning. Reliance is not 
placed by the draftsman only on the word "amend".
84. Similar language is used in Article 372 whereby existing laws continue to be in force 
until "altered or repealed or amended' by a competent Legislature or other competent 
authority.
85. In the original Article 243(2), in conferring power on the President to make 
regulations for the peace and good government of the territories in part D of the First 
Schedule, it is stated that "any regulation so made may repeal or amend any law made by 
Parliament." Here, the two words together give the widest power to make regulations 
inconsistent with any law made by Parliament
86. In Article 252 again, the two words are joined together to give a wider power. Clause 
(2) of Article 252 reads:
252(2). Any Act so passed by Parliament may be amended or repealed by 
an Act of Parliament passed or adopted in like manner but shall not, as 
respects any State to which it applies, be amended or repealed by an Act 
of the Legislature of that State.
87. In the proviso to Article 254, which deals with the inconsistency between laws made 
by Parliament and laws made by the Legislatures of States, it is stated:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall prevent Parliament from enacting 
at any time any law with respect to the same matter including a law adding 
to, amending, varying or repealing the law so made by the Legislature of 
the State; 
88. In Article 320(5), "all regulations made under the proviso to Clause (3)" can be 
modified "whether by way of repeal or amendment" as both Houses of Parliament or the 
House or both Houses of the Legislature of the States may make during the session in 
which they are so laid.
89. I have referred to the variation in the language of the various articles dealing with the' 
question of amendment or repeal in detail because our Constitution was drafted very 
carefully and I must presume that every word was chosen carefully and should have its 
proper meaning. I may rely for this principle on the following observations of the United 
States Supreme Court in Holmes v. Jennison (10) L. ed. 579; 594 and quoted with 
approval in William v. United States (77) L. ed. 1372; 1380:
In expounding the Constitution of the United States, every word must have 
its due force, and appropriate meaning: for it is evident from the whole 
instrument, that no word was unnecessarily used, or needlessly added....
90. Reference was made to Section 6(2) of the Indian Independence Act, 1947, in which 
the last three lines read:
...and the powers of the Legislature of each Dominion include the power 
to repeal or amend any such Act, order, rule or regulation in so far as it is 
part of the law of the Dominion.
Here, the comprehensive expression "repeal or amend" gives power to have a completely 
new Act different from an existing act of Parliament.
91. So, there is no doubt from a perusal of these provisions that different words have been 
used to meet different demands. In view of the great variation of the phrases used all 
through the Constitution it follows that the word "amendment" must derive its colour 
from Article 368 and the rest of the provisions of the Constitution. There is no doubt that 
it is not intended that the whole Constitution could be repealed. This much is conceded 
by the learned Counsel for the respondents.
92. Therefore, in order to appreciate the real content of the expression "amendment of 
this Constitution", in Article 368 I must look at the whole structure of the Constitution. 
The Constitution opens with a preamble which reads:
WE THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly resolved to constitute 
India into a SOVEREIGN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC and to secure to 
all its citizens:
JUSTICE, social, economic and political; 
LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship; 
EQUALITY of status and of opportunity; and to promote among them all; 
FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity of the 
Nation; 
IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this Twenty-sixth day of 
November, 1949, do HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO 
OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION.
93. This Preamble, and indeed the Constitution, was drafted in the light and direction of 
the Objective Resolutions adopted on January 22, 1947, which runs as follows:
(1) THIS CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY declares its firm and solemn 
resolve to proclaim India as an Independent Sovereign Republic and to 
draw up for her future governance a Consti-
(2) wherein the territories that now comprise British India, the territories 
that now form the Indian States, and such other parts of India as are 
outside British India and the States, as well as such other territories as are 
willing to be constituted into the Independent Sovereign India, shall be a 
Union of them all; and
(3) wherein the said territories, whether with their present boundaries or 
with such others as may be determined by the Constituent Assembly and 
thereafter according to the law of the Constitution, shall possess and retain 
the status of autonomous units, together with residuary powers, and 
exercise all powers and functions of government and administration, save 
and except such powers and functions as are vested in of assigned to the 
Union, or as are inherent or implied in the Union or resulting therefrom; 
and
(4) wherein all power and authority of the Sovereign Independent India, its 
constituent parts and organs of government, are derived from the people; 
and
(5) wherein shall be guaranteed and secured to all people of India justice, 
social, economic and political; equality of status, of opportunity, and 
before the law; freedom of thought, expression, belief, faith, worship, 
vocation, association and action, subject to law and public morality; and
(6) wherein adequate safeguards shall be provided for minorities backward 
and tribal areas, and depressed and other backward classes; and
(7) whereby shall be maintained the integrity of the territory of the 
Republic and its sovereign rights on land, sea, and air according to justice 
and the law of civilized nations, and
(8) this ancient land attains its rightful and honoured place in the world 
and makes its full and willing contribution to the promotion of world 
peace and the welfare of mankind.
94. While moving the resolution for acceptance of the Objectives Resolution, Pandit 
Jawaharlal Nehru said:
It seeks very feebly to tell the world of what we have thought or dreamt 
for so long, and what we now hope to achieve in the near future. It is in 
that spirit that I venture to place this Resolution before the House and it is 
in that spirit that I trust the House will receive it and ultimately pass it. 
And may I, Sir, also with all respect, suggest to you and to the House that, 
when the time comes for the passing of this Resolution let it be not done in 
the formal way by the raising of hands, but much more solemnly, by all of 
us standing up and thus taking this pledge anew.
95. I may here trace the history of the shaping of the Preamble because this would show 
that the Preamble was in conformity with the Constitution as it was finally accepted. Not 
only was the Constitution framed in the light of the Preamble but the Preamble was 
ultimately settled in the light of the Constitution. This appears from the following brief 
survey of the history of the framing of the Preamble extracted from the Framing of India's 
Constitution (A study) by B. Shiva Rao. In the earliest draft the Preamble was something 
formal and read : "We, the people of India, seeking to promote the common good, do 
hereby, through our chosen representatives, enact, adopt and give to ourselves this 
Constitution, (Shiva Rao's Framing of India's Constitution-A study-p. 127.).
96. After the plan of June 3, 1947, which led to the decision to partition the country and 
to set up two independent Dominions of India and Pakistan, on June 8, 1947, a joint sub-
committee of the Union Constitution and Provincial Constitution Committees, took note 
that the objective resolution would require amendment in view of the latest 
announcement of the British Government The' announcement of June 3 had made it clear 
that full independence, in the form of Dominion Status, would be conferred on India as 
from August 15, 1947. After examining the implications of partition the sub-committee 
thought that the question of making changes in the Objectives Resolution could 
appropriately be considered only when effect had actually been given to the June 3 
Plan.(Special Sub-Committee minutes June 9, 1947. Later on July 12, 1947, the special 
sub-committee again postponed consideration of the matter. Select Documents II, 20(ii), 
p. 617. (Shiva Rao's-Framing of India's Constitution-A study-(p. 127 footnote). The 
Union Constitution Committee provisionally accepted the Preamble as drafted by B.N. 
Rao and reproduced it in its report of July 4, 1947 without any change, with the tacit 
recognition at that stage that the Preamble would be finally based on the Objectives 
Resolution. In a statement circulated to members of the Assembly on July 18, 1947 
Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru inter alia, observed that the Preamble was covered more or less 
by the Objectives Resolution which it was intended to incorporate in the final 
Constitution subject to some modification on account of the political changes resulting 
from partition. Three days later, moving the report of the Union Constitution Committee 
for the consideration of the Assembly, he suggested that it was not necessary at that stage 
to consider the draft of the Preamble since the Assembly stood by the basic principles 
laid down in the Objectives Resolution and these could be incorporated in the Preamble 
in the light of the changed situation(Shiva Rao's-Framing of India's Constitution-A study-
pp. 127-128 (also see footnote 1 p. 128). The suggestion was accepted by the Assembly 
and further consideration of the Preamble was held over.
97. We need not consider the intermediate drafts, but in the meantime the declaration 
(See Constituent Assembly Debates, Vol. 8, page 2) was adopted at the end of April, 
1949 by the Government of the various Commonwealth countries and the resolution was 
ratified by Constituent Assembly on May 17; 1949 after two days' debate.
98. In the meantime the process of merger and integration of Indian States had been 
completed and Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel was able to tell the Constituent Assembly on 
October 12, 1949, that the new Constitution was "not an alliance between democracies 
and dynasties, but a real union of the Indian people, built on the basic concept of the 
sovereignty of the people(Shiva Rao's-Framing of India's Constitution-A study-pp. 130-
132).
99. The draft Preamble was considered by the Assembly on October 17, 1949. Shiva Rao 
observes that "the object of putting the Preamble last, the President of the Assembly 
explained, was to see that it was in conformity with the Constitution as accepted. "Once 
the transfer of power had taken place the question of British Parliament's subsequent 
approval which was visualised in the British Cabinet Commission's original plan of May 
1946 could no longer arise. The sovereign character of the Constituent Assembly thus 
became automatic with the rapid march of events without any controversy, and the words 
in the Preamble "give to ourselves this Constitution" became appropriate. The Preamble 
was adopted by the Assembly without any alteration. Subsequently the words and figure 
"this twenty-sixth day of November 1949" were introduced in the last paragraph to 
indicate the date on which the Constitution was finally adopted by the Constituent 
Assembly.
100. Regarding the use which can be made of the preamble in interpreting an ordinary 
statute, there is no doubt that it cannot be used to modify the language if the language of 
the enactment is plain and clear. If the language is not plain and clear, then the preamble 
may have effect either to extend or restrict the language used in the body of an 
enactment. "If the language of the enactment is capable of more than one meaning then 
that one is to be preferred which comes nearest to the purpose and scope of the 
preamble." (see Tbibhuban Parkash Nayyar v. The Union of India) [1970] 2 S.C.R. 732-
737.
101. We are, however, not concerned with the interpretation of an ordinary statute. As Sir 
Alladi Krishnaswami, a most eminent lawyer said, "so far as the Preamble is concerned, 
though in an ordinary statute we do not attach any importance to the Preamble, all 
importance has' to be attached to the Preamble in a Constitutional statute". (Constituent 
Assembly Debates Vol. 10, p. 417). Our Preamble outlines the objectives of the whole 
Constitution. It expresses "what we had thought or dreamt for so long.
102. In re. Berubari Union and Exchange of Enclaves [1960] 3 S.C.R. 250, 281-82 this 
was said about the Preamble:
There is no doubt that the declaration made by the people of India in 
exercise of their sovereign will in the preamble to the Constitution is, in 
the words of Story, "a key to open the mind of the makers" which may 
show the general purposes for which they made the several provisions in 
the Constitution; but nevertheless the preamble is not a part of the 
Constitution, and, as Willoughby has observed about the" preamble to the 
American Constitution, "it has never been regarded as the source of any 
substantive power conferred on the Government of the United States or 
any of its departments. Such powers embrace only those expressly granted 
in the body of the Constitution and such as may be implied from those so 
granted".
What is true about the power is equally true about the prohibitions and 
limitations.
103. Wanchoo, J. in Golaknath v. Punjab [1967] 2 S.C.R. 762; 838 and 914 relied on 
Berubari's case and said:
on a parity of reasoning we are of opinion that the preamble cannot 
prohibit or control in any way or impose any implied prohibitions or 
limitations on the power to amend the Constitution contained in Article 
368.
104. Bachawat, J. in this case observed:
Moreover the preamble cannot control the unambiguous language of the 
articles of the Constitution, see Wynes, Legislative Executive and Judicial 
powers in Australia, third edition pp. 694-5; in Re. Berubari Union & 
Exchange of Enclaves. [1960] 3 S.C.R. 250, 281-82.
105. With respect, the Court was wrong in holding, as has been shown above, that the 
Preamble is not a part of the Constitution unless the court was thinking of the distinction 
between the Constitution Statute and the Constitution, mentioned by Mr. Palkhivala. It 
was expressly voted to be a part of the Constitution. Further, with respect, no authority 
has been referred before us to establish the proposition that "what is true about the 
powers is equally true about the prohibitions and limitations." As I will show later, even 
from the preamble limitations have been derived in some cases.
106. It is urged in the written submission of Mr. Palkhivala that there is a distinction 
between the Indian Constitution Statute and the Constitution of India. He urges as 
follows:
This Constitution is the Constitution which follows the Preamble. It starts 
with Article 1 and ended originally with the Eighth Schedule and now 
ends with the Ninth Schedule after the First Amendment Act, 1951. The 
way the Preamble is drafted leaves no doubt that what follows, or is 
annexed to, the Preamble, is the Constitution of India.
107. He has also urged that the Preamble came into force on November 26, 1949 
alongwith Articles 5, 6, 7 etc. as provided in Article 394 because Articles 5, 6, 7 and the 
other Articles mentioned therein could hardly come into force without the enacting clause 
mentioned in the Preamble having come into force. He says that the Preamble is a part of 
the Constitution statute and not a part of the Constitution but precedes it. There is 
something to be said for his contention but, in my view, it is not necessary to base my 
decision on this distinction as it is not necessary to decide in the present case whether 
Article 368 enables Parliament to amend the Preamble. Parliament has not as yet chosen 
to amend the Preamble.
108. The Preamble was used by this Court as an aid to construction in Behram Khurshed 
Pasikaka v. The State of Bombay [1955] 1 S.C.R. 613 at p. 653. After referring to Part 
III, Mahajan, C.J., observed:
We think that the rights described as fundamental rights are a necessary 
consequence of the declaration in the preamble that the people of India 
have solemnly resolved to constitute India into a sovereign democratic 
republic and to secure to all its citizens justice, social, economic and 
political; liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship; equality 
of status and of opportunity. These fundamental rights have not been put 
in the Constitution merely for individual benefits, though ultimately they 
come into operation in considering individual rights. They have been put 
there as a matter of public policy and the doctrine of waiver can have no 
application to provisions of law which have been enacted as a matter of 
Constitutional policy.
109. Similarly in In re. The Kerala Education Bill [1959] S.C.R. 995, 1018-1019 1957, 
Das C.J. while considering the validity of the Kerala Education Bill 1957 observed:
In order to appreciate the true meaning, import and implications of the 
provisions of the Bill which are said to have given rise to doubts, it will be 
necessary to refer first to certain provisions of the Constitution which may 
have a bearing upon the questions under consideration and then to the 
actual provision of the Bill. The inspiring and nobly expressed preamble to 
our Constitution records the solemn resolve of the people of India to 
constitute.... (He then sets out the Preamble). Nothing provokes and 
stimulates thought and expression in people more than education. It is 
education that clarifies our belief and faith and helps to strengthen our 
spirit of worship. To implement and fortify these supreme purposes set 
forth in the preamble, Part III of our Constitution has provided for us 
certain fundamental rights.
110. In Sajjan Singh v. State of Rajasthan [1965] 1 S.C.R. 933; 968 Mudholkar, J. after 
assuming that the Preamble is not a part of the Constitution, observed:
While considering this question it would be of relevance to bear in mind 
that the preamble is not of the common run such as is to be found in an 
Act of a legislature. It has the stamp of deep deliberation and is marked by 
precision. Would this not suggest that the framers of the Constitution 
attached special significance to it?
111. Quick and Garran in their "Annotated Constitution of the Australian Commonwealth 
(1901 p. 283) "adopted the following sentence from Lord Thring's "Practical Legislation, 
p. 36":
A preamble may be used for other reasons to limit the scope of certain 
expressions or to explain facts or introduce definitions.
112. Thornton on "Legislative Drafting"-p. 137-opines that "construction of the preamble 
may have effect either to extend or to restrict general language used in the body of an 
enactment.
113. In Attorney-General v. Prince Ernest Augustus of Hanover [1957] A.C. 436, 460 the 
House of Lords considered the effect of the preamble on the interpretation of Princes 
Sophia Naturalization Act; 1705. It was held that "as a matter of construction of the Act, 
there was nothing in the Act or its preamble, interpreted in the light of the earlier relevant 
statutes...capable of controlling and limiting the plain and ordinary meaning of the 
material words of the enacting provisions and that the class of lineal descendants "born or 
hereafter to be born" meant the class of such descendants in all degrees without any limit 
as to time." The House of Lords further held that "looking at the Act from the point of 
view of 1705 there was no such manifest absurdity in this construction as would entitle 
the court to reject it.
114. Mr. Seervai referred to the passage from the speech of Lord Normand, at p. 467. The 
passage is lengthy but I may quote these sentences:
It is only when it conveys a clear and definite meaning in comparison with 
relatively obscure or indefinite enacting words that the preamble may 
legitimately prevail. If they admit of only one construction, that 
construction will receive effect even if it is inconsistent with the preamble, 
but if the enacting words are capable of either of the constructions offered 
by the parties, the construction which fits the preamble may be preferred.
115. Viscount Simonds put the matter at page 463, thus:
On the one hand, the proposition can be accepted that "it is a settled rule 
that the preamble cannot be made use of to control the enactments 
themselves where they are expressed in clear and unambiguous terms". I 
quote the words of Chitty L.J., which were cordially approved by Lord 
Davey in Powell v. Kempton Park Racecourse Co. Ltd. (1889) A.C. 143, 
185. On the other hand it must often be difficult to say that any terms are 
clear and unambiguous until they have been studied in their context
116. This case shows that if on reading Article 368 in the context of the Constitution I 
find the word "Amendment" ambiguous I can refer to the Preamble to find which 
construction would fit in with the Preamble.
117. In State of Victoria v. The Commonwealth 45 A.L.J. 251 which is discussed in 
detail later, a number of Judges refer to the federal structure of the Constitution. It is in 
the preamble of the Commonwealth of Australia Constitution Act, 1902 that 'one 
indissoluble Federal Commonwealth' is mentioned.
118. There is a sharp conflict of opinion in Australia respecting the question whether an 
amendment can be made which would be inconsistent with the Preamble of the 
Constitution Act referring to the "indissoluble" character and the sections which refer to 
the "Federal" nature of the Constitution. After referring to this conflict, Wynes(Wynes 
Legislative, Executive and Judicial Powers in Australia, Fourth Edn. p. 506). observes:
Apart from the rule which excludes the preamble generally from 
consideration in statutory interpretation, it is clear that, when all is said 
and done, the preamble at the most is, only a recital of the intention which 
the Act' seeks to effect; and it is a recital of a present (i.e., as in 1900) 
intention. But in any event the insertion of an express reference to 
amendment in the Constitution itself must surely operate as a qualification 
upon the mere recital of the reasons for its creation.
119. I am not called upon to say which view is correct but it does show that in Australia, 
there is a sharp conflict of opinion as to whether the Preamble can control the amending 
power.
120. Story in his Commentaries on the Constitution of the United States states : [(1883) 
Vol. 1]
It (Preamble) is properly resorted to, where doubts or ambiguities arise 
upon the words of the enacting part; for if they are dear and unambiguous, 
there seems little room for interpretation, except in cases leading to an 
obvious absurdity, or to a direct overthrow of the intention express in the 
preamble.
There does not seem any reason why, in a fundamental law or Constitution 
of government, an equal attention should not be given to the intention of 
the framers, as stated in the preamble. And accordingly we find, that it has 
been constantly referred to by statesmen and jurists to aid them in the 
exposition of its provisions.
121. Story further states at page 447-448:
And the uniform doctrine of the highest judicial authority has accordingly 
been, that it was the act of the people, and not of the states; and that it 
bound the latter, as subordinate to the people. "Let us turn," said Mr. Chief 
Justice Jay, "to the Constitution. The people therein declare, that their 
design in establishing it comprehended six objects: (1) To form a more 
perfect union; (2) to establish justice; (3) to insure domestic tranquillity; 
(4) to provide for the common defence; (5) to promote the general welfare; 
(6) to secure the blessings of liberty to themselves and their posterity. It 
would," he added, "be pleasing and useful to consider and trace the 
relations, which each of these objects bears to the others; and to show, 
that, collectively, they comprise every thing requisite, with the blessing of 
Divine Providence, to render a people prosperous and happy." In Hunter v. 
Martin (1 Wheat. R. 305, 324), the Supreme Court say, (as we have seen) 
"the Constitution of the United States was ordained and established, not by 
the states in their sovereign capacities, but emphatically, as the preamble 
of the Constitution declares, by the people of the "United States;" and 
language still more expressive will be found used on other solemn 
occasions.
122. "The Supreme Court of United States (borrowing some of the language of the 
Preamble to the Federal Constitution) has appropriately stated that the people of the 
United States erected their Constitutions or forms of government to establish justice, to 
promote the general welfare, to secure the blessings of liberty, and to protect their 
persons and property from violence". (American Jurisprudence, 2d. Vol. 16 p. 184).
123. In the United States the Declaration of Independence is sometimes referred to in 
determining Constitutional questions. It is stated in American Jurisprudence (2d. 16. p. 
189):
While statements of principles contained in the Declaration of 
Independence do not have the force of organic law and therefore cannot be 
made the basis of judicial decision as to the limits of rights and duties, yet: 
it has been said that it is always safe to read the letter of the Constitution 
in the spirit of the Declaration of Independence, and the courts sometimes 
refer to the Declaration in determining Constitutional questions.
124. It seems to me that the Preamble of our Constitution is of extreme importance and 
the Constitution should be read and interpreted in the light of the grand and noble vision 
expressed in the Preamble.
125. Now I may briefly describe the scheme of the Constitution. Part I of the Constitution 
deals with "the Union and its Territory". As originally enacted, Article 1 read as follows:
1. India, that is Bharat, shall be a Union of States.
2. The States and the territories thereof shall be the States and their 
territories specified in Parts A, B and C of the First Schedule.
3. The territory of India shall comprise-
(a) the territories of the States; 
(b) the territories specified in Part D of the First Schedule; 
and
(c) such other territories as may be acquired.
126. Article 2 enabled Parliament to admit into the Union, or establish, new States on 
such terras and conditions as it thinks fit. Article 3 and 4 dealt with the formation of new 
States and alteration of areas, boundaries or names of existing States.
127. Part II dealt with "Citizenship". The heading of Part III is "Fundamental Rights". It 
first describes the expression "the State" to include "the Government and Parliament of 
India and the Government and the Legislature of each of the States and all local or other 
authorities within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India." 
(Article 12), Article 13 provides that laws inconsistent with or in derogation of the 
fundamental rights shall be void. This applies to existing laws as well as laws made after 
the coming into force of the Constitution. For the time being I assume that in Article 
13(2) the word "law" includes Constitutional amendment.
128. The fundamental rights conferred by the Constitution include right to equality before 
the law, (Article 14), prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex 
or place of birth, (Article 15), equality of opportunity in matters of public employment, 
(Article 16), right to freedom of speech and expression, to assemble peaceably and 
without arms, to form association or unions, to move freely throughout the territory of 
India, to reside and settle in any part of the territory of India, to acquire, hold and dispose 
of property; and to practice any profession or to carry on any occupation, trade or 
business. (Article 19). Reasonable restrictions can be imposed on the rights under Article 
19 in respect of various matters.
129. Article 20 protects a person from being convicted of any offence except for violation 
of a law in force at the time of the commission of the act charged as an offence or to be 
subjected to a penalty greater than that which might have been inflicted under the law in 
force at the time of the commission of the offence. It further provides that no person shall 
be prosecuted and punished for the same offence more than once, and no person accused 
of any offence shall be compelled to be a witness against himself.
130. Article 21 provides that no person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty 
except according to procedure established by law.
131. Article 22 gives further protection against arrest and detention in certain cases. 
Article 22(1) provides that "no person who is arrested shall be detained in custody 
without being informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds for such arrest nor shall he be 
denied the right to consult, and to be defended by, a legal practitioner of his choice." 
Article 22(2) provides that "every person who is arrested and detained in custody shall be 
produced before the nearest magistrate within a period of twenty-four hours of such arrest 
excluding the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the court of the 
magistrate and no such person shall be detained in custody beyond the said period 
without the authority of a magistrate".
132. Article 22(4) deals with Preventive Detention. Article 23 prohibits traffic in human 
beings and other similar forms of forced labour. Article 24 provides that "no child below 
the age of fourteen years shall be employed to work in any factory or mine or engaged in 
any other hazardous employment.
133. Articles 25, 26, 27 and 28 deal with the freedom of religion. Article 25(1) provides 
that "subject to public order, morality and health and to the other provisions of this Part, 
all persons are equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess, 
practise and propagate religion." Article 26 enables every religious denomination or 
section thereof, subject to public order, morality and health, to establish and manage 
institutions for religious and, charitable purposes; to manage their own affairs in matters 
of religion, to own and acquire movable and immovable property, and to administer such 
property in accordance with law. Article 27 enables presons to resist payment of any 
taxes the proceeds of which are specifically appropriated in payment of expenses for the 
promotion or maintenance of any particular religion or religious denomination. Article 28 
deals with freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in certain 
educational institutions.
134. Article 29(1) gives protection to minorities and provides that "any section of the 
citizens residing in the territory of India or any part thereof having a distinct language, 
script or culture of its own shall have the right to conserve the same." Article 29(2) 
provides that "no person shall be denied admission into any educational institution 
maintained by the State or receiving aid out of State funds on grounds only of religion, 
race, caste, language or any of them.
135. Article 30 gives further rights to minorities whether based on religion or language to 
establish and administer educational institutions of their choice. Article 30(2) prohibits 
the State from discriminating against any educational institution, in granting aid to 
educational institutions, on the ground that it is under the management of a minority, 
whether based on religion or language.
136. As will be shown later the inclusion of special rights for minorities has great 
significance. They were clearly intended to be inalienable.
137. The right to property comes last and is dealt with the Article 31. As originally 
enacted, it dealt with the right to property and prevented deprivation of property save by 
authority of law, and then provided for compulsory acquisition for public purposes on 
payment of compensation. It had three significant provisions, which show the intention of 
the Constitution-makers regarding property rights. The first is Article 31(4). This 
provision was intended to protect legislation dealing with agrarian reforms. The second 
provision, Article 31(5)(a), was designed to protect existing legislation dealing with 
compulsory acquisition. Some acts, saved by this provision did not provide for payment 
of full compensation e.g. U.P. Town Improvement Act, 1919. The third provision Article 
31(6) provided a protective umbrella to similar laws enacted not more than eighteen 
months before the commencement of the Constitution.
138. The fundamental rights were considered of such importance that right was given to 
an aggrieved person to move the highest court of the land, i.e., the Supreme Court, by 
appropriate proceedings for the enforcement of the rights conferred by this part, and this 
right was guaranteed. Article 32(2) confers very wide powers on the Supreme Court, to 
issue directions or orders or writs including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, 
mandamus, prohibition, quo warranto and certiorari, whichever may be appropriate, for 
the enforcement of any of the rights conferred by this Part. Article 32(4) further provides 
that "the right guaranteed by this article shall not be suspended except as otherwise 
provided for by this Constitution.
139. Article 33 enables Parliament by law to "determine to what extent any of the rights 
conferred by this Part shall, in their application to the members of the Armed Forces or 
the Forces charged with the maintenance of public order, be restricted or abrogated so as 
to ensure the proper discharge of their duties and the maintenance of discipline among 
them.
140. This articles shows the care with which, the circumstances in which, fundamental 
rights can be restricted or abrogated were contemplated and precisely described.
141. Article 34 enables Parliament, by law, to indemnify any person in the service of the 
Union, or of a State or any other person in connection with acts done while martial law 
was in force in a particular area.
142. Part IV of the Constitution contains directive principles of State policy. Article 37 
specifically provides that "the provisions contained in this Part shall not be enforceable 
by any court, but the principles therein laid down are nevertheless fundamental in the 
governance of the country and it shall be the duty of the State to apply these principles in 
making laws." This clearly shows, and it has also been laid down by this Court, that these 
provisions are not justiciable and cannot be enforced by any Court. The Courts could not, 
for instance, issue a mandamus directing the State to provide adequate means of 
livelihood to every citizen, or that the ownership and control of the material resources of 
the community be so distributed as best to subserve the common good, or that there 
should be equal pay for equal work for both men and women.
143. Some of the directive principles are of great fundamental importance in the 
governance of the country. But the question is not whether they are important; the 
question is whether they override the fundamental rights. In other words, ran Parliament 
abrogate the fundamental rights in order to give effect to some of the directive principles 
?
144. I may now briefly notice the directive principles mentioned in Part IV. Article 38 
provides that "the State shall strive to promote the welfare of the people by securing and 
protecting as effectively as it may a social order in which justice, social, economic and 
political, shall inform all the institutions of the national life." Now, this directive is 
compatible with the fundamental rights because surely the object of many of the 
fundamental rights is to ensure that there shall be justice, social, economic and political, 
in the country. Article 39, which gives particular directions to the State, reads thus:
39. The State shall, in particular, direct its policy towards securing-
(a) that the citizens, men and women equally, have the right 
to an adequate means of livelihood; 
(b) that the ownership and control of the material resources 
of the community are so distributed as best to subserve the 
common good; 
(c) that the operation of the economic system does not 
result in the concentration of wealth and means of 
production to the common detriment; 
(d) that there is equal pay for equal work for both men and 
women; 
(e) that the health and strength of workers, men and 
women, and the tender age of children are not abused and 
that citizens are not forced by economic necessity to enter 
avocations unsuited to their age or strength; 
(f) that childhood and youth are protected against 
exploitation and against moral and material abandonment.
145. Article 40 deals with the organisation of village panchayats. Articles 41 deals with 
the right to work, to education and to public assistance in certain cases. Article 42 directs 
that the State shall make provisions for securing just and humane conditions of work and 
for maternity relief. Article 43 direct that "the State shall endeavour to secure, by suitable 
legislation or economic organisation or in any other way, to all workers, agricultural, 
industrial or otherwise, work, a living wage, conditions of work ensuring a decent 
standard of life and full enjoyment of leisure and social and cultural opportunities and, in 
particular, the State shall endeavour to promote cottage industries on an individual or 
cooperative basis in rural areas.
146. Article 44 enjoins that the "State shall endeavour to secure for the citizens a uniform 
civil code throughout the territory of India." Desirable as it is, the Government has not 
been able to take any effective steps towards the realisation of this goal. Obviously no 
Court can compel the Government to lay down a uniform civil code even though it is 
essentially desirable in the interest of the integrity, and unity of the country.
147. Article 45 directs that "the State shall endeavour to provide, within a period of ten 
years from the commencement of this Constitution, for free compulsory education for all 
children until they complete the age of fourteen years." This again is a very desirable 
directive. Although the Government has not been able to fulfil it completely, it cannot be 
compelled by any court of law to provide such education.
148. Article 46 supplements the directive given above and enjoins the State to promote 
with special care the educational and economic interests of the weaker sections of the 
people, and in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, and to 
protect them from social injustice and all forms of exploitation.
149. Article 47 lays down as one of the duties of the State to raise the standard of living 
and to improve public health, and to bring about prohibition. Article 48 directs the State 
to endeavour to organise agriculture and animal husbandry on modern and scientific 
lines, and in particular, to take steps for preserving and improving the breeds, and 
prohibiting the slaughter of cows and calves and other milch and draught cattle.
150. Article 49 deals with protection of monuments and places and objects of national 
importance. Article 50 directs that the State shall take steps to separate the judiciary from 
the executive in the public services of the State. This objective has been, to a large extent, 
carried out without infringing the fundamental rights.
151. In his preliminary note on the fundamental Rights, Sir B.N. Rau, dealing with the 
directive principles, observed:
The principles set forth in this Part are intended for the general guidance 
of the appropriate Legislatures and Government in India (hereinafter 
referred to collectively as 'the State'). The application of these principles in 
legislation and administration shall be the care of the State and shall not be 
cognizable by any Court.
152. After setting out certain directive principles, he observed:
It is obvious that none of the above provisions is suitable for enforcement 
by the courts. They are really in the nature of moral precepts for the 
authorities of the State. Although it may be contended that the 
Constitution is not the proper place for moral precepts, nevertheless 
Constitutional declaration of policy of this kind are now becoming 
increasingly frequent. (See the Introduction to the I.L.O. publication 
Constitutional Provisions concerning Social and Economic Policy, 
Montreal, 1944). They have at least an educative value. (pages 33-34-
Shiva Rao : Framing of Indian Constitution : Doc. Vol. II).
Then he referred to the genesis of the various articles mentioned in the preliminary note.
153. One must pause and ask the question as to why did the Constituent. Assembly resist 
the persistent efforts of Shri B.N. Rau to make fundamental rights subject to the directive 
principles. The answer seems plain enough : The Constituent Assembly deliberately 
decided not to do so.
154. Sir Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar, in his note dated March 14, 1947, observed:
A distinction has necessarily to be drawn between rights which are 
justiciable and rights which are merely intended as a guide and directive 
objectives to state policy.
155. It is impossible to equate the directive principles with fundamental rights though it 
cannot be denied that they are very important. But to say that the directive principles give 
a directive to take away fundamental rights in order to achieve what is directed by the 
directive principles seems to me a contradiction in terms.
156. I may here mention that while our fundamental rights and directive principles were 
being fashioned and approved of by the Constituent Assembly, on December 10, 1948 
the General Assembly of the United Nations adopted a Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights. The Declaration may not be a legally binding instrument but it shows how India 
understood the nature of Human Rights. I may here quote only the Preamble:
Whereas recognition of the inherent dignity of the equal and inalienable 
rights of all members of the human family is the foundation of freedom, 
justice and peace in the world.
(emphasis supplied)
157. Whereas disregard and contempt for human rights have resulted in barbarous acts 
which have outraged the conscience of mankind, and the advent of a world in which 
human beings shall enjoy freedom of speech and belief and freedom from fear and want 
has been proclaimed as the highest aspiration of the common people.
158. Whereas it is essential, if man is not to be compelled to have recourse, as a last 
resort, to rebellion against tyranny and oppression, that human rights should be protected 
by the rule of law.
159. Whereas it is essential to promote the development of friendly relations between 
nations.
160. Whereas the peoples of the United Nations have in the Charter reaffirmed their faith 
in fundamental human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human person and in the 
equal rights of men and women and have determined to promote social progress and 
better standards of life in larger freedom.
161. Whereas Member States have pledged themselves to achieve, in cooperation with 
the United Nations, the promotion of universal respect for and observance of human 
rights and fundamental freedoms.
162. Whereas a common understanding of these rights and freedoms is of the greatest 
importance for the full realization of this pledge
163. In the Preamble to the International Covenant on Economic and Social and Cultural 
Rights 1966, inalienability of rights is indicated in the first Para as follows:
Considering that, in accordance with the principles proclaimed in the 
Charter of the United Nations, recognition of the inherent dignity and of 
the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family is the 
foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world.
164. Do rights remain inalienable if they can be amended out of existence ? The 
Preamble Articles 1, 55, 56, 62, 68 and 76 of the United Nations Charter had provided the 
basis for the elaboration in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Although there is 
a sharp conflict of opinion whether respect for human dignity and fundamental human 
rights is obligatory under the Charter (see Oppenheim's International Law; 8th ed. Vol. 1, 
pp. 740-41; footnote 3), it seems to me that, in view of Article 51 of the directive 
principles, this Court must interpret language of the Constitution, if not intractable, which 
is after all a municipal law, in the light of the United Nations Charter and the solemn 
declaration subscribed to by India. Article 51 reads:
51. The State shall endeavour to-
(a) promote international peace and security; 
(b) maintain just and honourable relations between nations; 
(c) foster respect for international law and treaty 
obligations in the dealings of organised peoples with one 
another; and
(d) encourage settlement of international disputes by 
arbitration.
165. As observed by Lord Denning in Corocraft v. Pan American Airways (1969) 1 All 
E.R. 82; 87 "it is the duty of these courts to construe our Legislation so as to be in 
conformity with international law and not in conflict with it." (See also Oppenheim supra, 
pp. 45-46; American Jurisprudence 2nd, Vol. 45, p. 351).
166. Part V Chapter I, deals with the Executive; Chapter II with Parliament-conduct or its 
business, qualification of its members, legislation procedure etc. Article 83 provides that:
83. (1) The Council of States shall not be subject to dissolution, but as 
nearly as possible one-third of the members thereof shall retire as soon as 
may be on the expiration of every second year in accordance with the 
provisions made in that behalf by Parliament by law.
(2) The House of the People unless sooner dissolved, shall continue for 
five years from the date appointed for its first meeting and no longer and 
the expiration of the said period of five years shall operate as a dissolution 
of the House: ...
Under the proviso this period can be extended while a Proclamation of Emergency is in 
operation for a period not exceeding in any case beyond a period of six months after the 
Proclamation has ceased to operate. It was provided in Article 85(1) before its 
amendment by the Constitution (First Amendment) Act 1951 that the House of 
Parliament shall be summoned to meet twice at least in every year, and six months shall 
not intervene between their last sittings in one session and the date appointed for their 
first sitting in the next session.
167. Article 123 gives power to the President to promulgate ordinances during recess of 
Parliament Chapter IV deals with Union Judiciary.
168. Part VI, as originally enacted dealt with the States in Part A of the First Schedule-the 
Executive, the State Legislatures and the High Courts. Article 174 deals with the 
summoning of the House of Legislature and its provisions are similar to that of Article 
85. Article 213 confers legislative powers on the Governor during the recess of State 
Legislature by promulgating ordinances.
169. Part XI deals with the relation between the Union and the States; Chapter I 
regulating legislative relations and Chapter II administrative relations.
170. Part XII deals with Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits. We need only notice 
Article 265 which provides that "no tax shall be levied or collected except by authority of 
law".
171. Part XIII deals with Trade, Commerce and Intercourse within the Territory of India. 
Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the 
territory of India shall be free (Article 301).
172. Part XIV deals with Services under the Union and the States. Part XVI contains 
special provisions relating to certain classes-the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes 
etc. It reserved seats in the House of the People for these classes. Article 331 enables the 
President to nominate not more than two members of the Anglo-Indian community if it is 
not adequately represented in the House of the People. Article 332 deals with the 
reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Legislative 
Assemblies of the States. In Article 334 it is provided that the above mentioned 
reservation of seats and special representation to certain classes shall cease on the expiry 
of a period of ten years from the commencement of this Constitution. Article 335 deals 
with claims of scheduled castles and scheduled tribes to services and posts. Article 336 
makes special provisions for Anglo-Indian community in certain services, and Article 
337 makes special provisions in respect of educational grants for the benefit of Anglo-
Indian community. Article 338 provides for the creation of a Special Officer for 
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, etc. to be appointed by the President, and prescribes 
his duties. Article 340 enables the President to appoint a Commission to investigate the 
conditions of socially and educationally backward classes within the territory of India 
which shall present a report and make recommendations on steps that should be taken to 
remove difficulties and improve their condition. Article 341 enables the President to 
specify the castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within castes, races or tribes which 
shall for the purposes of this Constitution be deemed to be Scheduled Castes in relation to 
that State. Similarly, Article 342 provides that the President may specify the tribes or 
tribal communities or parts of or groups within tribes or tribal communities which shall 
be deemed to be Scheduled Tribes in relation to that State.
173. Part XVII deals with Official Language, and Part XVIII with Emergency Provisions. 
Article 352 is important. It reads:
352.(1) If the President is satisfied that a grave emergency exists whereby 
the security of India or of any part of the territory thereof is threatened, 
whether by war or external aggression or internal disturbance, he may, by 
Proclamation, make a declaration to that effect.
174. Article 353 describes the effect of the Proclamation of Emergency. The effect is that 
the executive power of the Union shall be extended to the giving of directions to any 
State as to the manner in which the executive power thereof is to be exercised, and the 
Parliament gets the power to make laws with respect to any matter including the power to 
make laws conferring powers and imposing duties, etc., notwithstanding that it is one 
which is not enumerated in the Union List. Article 354 enables the President by order to 
make exceptions and modifications in the provisions of Article 268 to 279. Under Article 
355 it is the duty of the Union to protect every State against external aggression and 
internal disturbance and to ensure that the government of every State is carried on in 
accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. Article 356 contains provisions in 
case of failure of Constitutional machinery in a State.
175. Article 358 provides for suspension of the provisions of Article 19 during 
Emergency. It reads:
358. While a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation, nothing in 
Article 19 shall restrict the power of the State as defined in Part III to 
make any law or to take any executive action which the State would but 
for the provisions contained in that Part be competent to make or to take, 
but any law so made shall, to the extent of the incompetency, cease to 
have effect as soon as the Proclamation ceases to operate, except as 
respects things done or omitted to be done before the law so ceases to have 
effect.
176. Article 359 is most important for our purpose. It provides that:
359. (1) Where a Proclamation of Emergency is in operation the President 
may by order declare that the right to move any court for the enforcement 
of such of the rights conferred by Part III as may be mentioned in the 
order and all proceedings pending in any court for the enforcement of the 
rights so mentioned shall remain suspended for the period during which 
the Proclamation is in force or for such shorter period as may be specified 
in the order.
(2) An order made as aforesaid may extend to the whole or any part of the 
territory of India.
(3) Every order made under Clause (1) shall, as soon as maybe after it is 
made be laid before each House of Parliament.
177. These two articles, namely Article 358 and Article 359 show that the Constitution 
makers contemplated that fundamental rights might impede the State in meeting an 
emergency, and it was accordingly provided that Article 19 shall not operate for a limited 
time, and so also Article 32 and Article 226 if the President so declares by order. If it was 
the design that fundamental rights might be abrogated surely they would have expressly 
provided it somewhere.
178. I may here notice an argument that the enactment of Articles 358 and 359 showed 
that the fundamental rights were not treated as inalienable rights. I am unable to infer this 
deduction from these articles. In an emergency every citizen is liable to be subjected to 
extraordinary restrictions.
179. I may here notice some relevant facts which constitute the background of the 
process of drafting the Constitution. The British Parliament knowing the complexities of 
the structure of the Indian people expressly provided in Section 6(6) of the Indian 
Independence Act, 1947, that "the powers referred to in Sub-section (1) of this section 
extends to the making of laws limiting for the future the powers of the legislature of the 
Dominion." Sub-section (1) of Section 6 reads:
The legislature of each of the new Dominions shall have full power to 
make laws for that Dominion, including laws having extraterritorial 
operation.
That Section 6(1) included making provision as to the Constitution of the Dominion is 
made clear by Section 8(1) which provided : "In the case of each of the new Dominions, 
the powers of legislature of the Dominion shall for the purpose of making provision as to 
the Constitution of the Dominion be exercisable in the first instance by the Constituent 
Assembly of that Dominion, and references in this Act to the legislature of the Dominion 
shall be construed accordingly.
(Emphasis supplied).
180. These provisions of the Indian Independence Act amply demonstrate that when the 
Constituent Assembly started functioning, it knew, if it acted under the Indian 
Independence Act, that it could limit the powers of the future Dominion Parliaments.
181. No similar provisions exists in any of the Independence Acts in respect of other 
countries, enacted by the British Parliament, e.g., Ceylon Independence Act, 1947, Ghana 
Independence Act, 1957, Federation of Malaya Independence Act, 1957, Nigeria 
Independence Act, 1960, Sierra Leone Independence Act, 1961, Tanganyika 
Independence Act, 1961, Southern Rhodesia Act, 1965, Jamaica Independence Act, 1962.
182. I may mention that the aforesaid provisions in the Indian Independence Act were 
enacted in line with the Cabinet Statement dated May 16, 1947 and the position of the 
Congress Party. Para 20(See : Shiva Rao-The Framing of India's Constitution, Vol. I, p. 
216) of the Statement by the Cabinet Mission provided:
The Advisory Committee on the rights of citizens, minorities, and tribal 
and excluded areas should contain full representation of the interests 
affected, and their function will be to report to the Union Constituent 
Assembly upon the list of Fundamental Rights, the clauses for the 
protection of minorities, and a scheme for the administration of the tribal 
and excluded areas, and to advise whether these rights should be 
incorporated in the Provincial, Group, or Union Constitution.
183. In clarifying this statement Sir Stafford Cripps at a Press Conference dated May 16, 
1946 stated:
But in order to give these minorities and particularly the smaller minorities 
like the Indian Christians and the Anglo-Indians and also the tribal 
representatives a better opportunity of influencing minority provisions, we 
have made provision for the setting up by the Constitution-making body of 
an influential advisory Commission which will take the initiative in the 
preparation of the list of fundamental rights, the minority protection 
clauses and the proposals for the administration of tribal and excluded 
areas. This Commission will make its recommendations to the 
Constitutionmaking body and will also suggest at which stage or stages in 
the Constitution these provisions should be inserted, that is whether in the 
Union, Group or Provincial Constitutions or in any two or more of them. 
(P. 224, Supra).
184. In the letter dated May 20, 1946, from Maulana Abul Kalam Azad to the Secretary 
of State, it is stated:
The principal point, however, is, as stated above, that we look upon this 
Constituent Assembly as a sovereign body which can decide as it chooses 
in regard to any matter before it and can give effect to its decisions. The 
only limitation, we recognise is that in regard to certain major communal 
issues the decision should be by a majority of each of the two major 
communities. (P. 251, Supra).
185. In his reply dated May 22, 1946, the Secretary of State observed:
When the Constituent Assembly has completed its labours, His Majesty's 
Government will recommend to Parliament such action as may be 
necessary for the cession of sovereignty to the Indian people, subject only 
to two provisos which are mentioned in the statement and which are not, 
we believe, controversial, namely, adequate provision for the protection of 
minorities and willingness to conclude a treaty to cover matters arising out 
of the transfer of power. 
(Emphasis supplied)
186. In the Explanatory statement dated May 22, 1946, it was again reiterated as follows:
When the Constituent Assembly has completed its labours, His Majesty's 
Government will recommend to Parliament such action as may be 
necessary for the cession of sovereignty to the Indian people, subject only 
to two matters which are mentioned in the statement and which, we 
believe are not controversial, namely, adequate provision for the 
protection of the minorities (paragraph 20 of the statement) and 
willingness to conclude a treaty with His Majesty's Government to cover 
matters arising out of the transfer of power (paragraph 22 of the statement) 
(P. 258, Supra).
(Emphasis supplied)
187. In pursuance of the above, a resolution for the setting up of an Advisory Committee 
on fundamental rights was moved by Govind Ballabh Pant in the Constituent Assembly 
on January 24, 1947. He laid special importance on the issue of minorities. The Advisory 
Committee met on February 27, 1947 to constitute various sub-committees including the 
Minorities Sub-Committee. The Sub-Committee on Minorities met later the same day. A 
questionnaire was drafted to enquire about political, economic, religious, educational and 
cultural safeguards. In other words all these safeguards were considered.
188. Divergent views were expressed, and the Minorities Sub-Committee met on April 
17, 18 and 19, 1947 to consider this important matter. At these meetings the sub-
committee considered the interim proposals of the fundamental rights Sub-Committee in 
so far as these had a bearing on minority rights. These discussions covered such 
important matters as the prohibition of discrimination on grounds of race, religion, caste, 
etc.; the abolition of untouchability and the mandatory requirements that the enforcement 
of any disability arising out of untouchability should be made an offence punishable 
according to law; freedom to profess, practise and propagate one's religion; the right to 
establish and maintain institutions for religious and charitable purposes; the right to be 
governed by one's personal, law; the right to use one's mother-tongue and establish 
denominational communal or language schools etc.
189. Having dealt with the question of fundamental rights for minorities, the Minorities 
Sub-Committee met again on July 21, 1947, to consider the political safeguards for 
minorities and their presentation in the public services.
190. In forwarding the report of the Advisory Committee on the subject of Minority 
Rights, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, in his report dated August 8, 1947, said:
...It should be treated as supplementary to the one forwarded to you with 
my letter No. CA/24/Com./47, dated the 23rd April 1947 and dealt with by 
the Assembly during the April session. That report dealt with justiciable 
fundamental rights; these rights, whether applicable to all citizens 
generally or to members of minority communities in particular offer a 
most valuable safeguard for minorities over a comprehensive field of 
social life. The present report deals with what may broadly be described as 
political safeguards of minorities and covers the following points:
(i) Representation in Legislature; joint versus separate 
electorates; and weightage.
(ii) Reservation of seats for minorities in Cabinets.
(iii) Reservation for minorities in the public services.
(iv) Administrative machinery to ensure protection of 
minority rights.
191. Sardar Patel, while moving the report for consideration on August 27, 1947, said:
You will remember that we passed the Fundamental Rights Committee's 
Report which was sent by the Advisory Committee; the major part of 
those rights has been disposed of and accepted by this House. They cover 
a very wide range of the rights of minorities which give them ample 
protection; and yet there are certain political safeguards which have got to 
be specifically considered. An attempt has been made in this report to 
enumerate those safeguards which are matters of common knowledge, 
such as representation in legislatures, that is, joint versus separate 
electorate. 
(Emphasis supplied)
192. The above proceedings show that the minorities were particularly concerned with 
the fundamental rights which were the subject-matter of discussion by the Fundamental 
Rights Committee.
193. The above brief summary of the work of the Advisory Committee and the Minorities 
Sub-Committee shows that no one ever contemplated that fundamental rights 
appertaining to the minorities would be liable to be abrogated by an amendment of the 
Constitution. The same is true about the proceedings in the Constituent Assembly. There 
is no hint anywhere that abrogation of minorities rights was ever in the contemplation of 
the important members of the Constituent Assembly. It seems to me that in the context of 
the British Plan, the setting up of Minorities Sub-Committee, the Advisory Committee 
and the proceedings of these Committees, as well as the proceedings in the Constituent 
Assembly mentioned above, it is impossible to read the expression "Amendment of the 
Constitution" as empowering Parliament to abrogate the rights of minorities.
194. Both sides relied on the speeches made in the Constituent Assembly. It is, however, 
a sound rule of construction that speeches made by members of a legislature in the course 
of debates relating to the enactment of a statute cannot be used as aids for interpreting 
any of provisions of the statute. The same rule has been applied to the provisions of this 
Constitution by this Court in State of Travancore-Cochin and Ors. v. Bombay Co. Ltd. 
[1952] S.C.R. 1112, 1121 Shastri, C.J., speaking for the Court observed:
'It remains only to point out that the use made by the learned Judges below 
of the speeches made by the Members of the Constituent Assembly in the 
course of the debates on the draft Constitution is unwarranted. That this 
form of extrinsic aid to the interpretation of statutes is not admissible has 
been generally accepted in England, and the same rule has been observed 
in the construction of Indian statutes-see Administrator-General of Bengal 
v. Prem Nath Mallick [1895] 22 I.A. 107-118. The reason behind the rule 
was explained by one of us in Gopalan's [1950] S.C.R. 88 case thus:
A speech made in the course of the debate on a bill could at 
best be indicative of the subjective intent of the speaker, 
but it could not reflect the inarticulate mental process lying 
behind the majority vote which carried the bill. Nor is it 
reasonable to assume that the minds of all those legislators 
were in accord,
or, as it is more tersely put in an American case-
Those who did not speak may not have agreed with those 
who did and those who spoke might differ from each other-
United States v. Trans-Missouri Freight Association.
This rule of exclusion has not always been adhered to in 
America, and sometimes distinction is made between using 
such material to ascertain the purpose of a statute and using 
it for ascertaining its meaning. It would seem that the rule 
is adopted in Canada and Australia-see Craies on Statute 
Law, 5th Ed. p. 122.
195. In Golak Nath's [1967] 2 S.C.R. 762; 792; 922 case, Subba Rao, C.J., referred to 
certain portions of the speeches made by Pandit Nehru and Dr. Ambedkar but he made it 
clear at p. 792 that he referred to these speeches "not with a view to interpret the 
provisions of Article 368, which we propose to do on its own terms, but only to notice the 
transcendental character given to the fundamental rights by two of the important 
architects of the Constitution." Bachawat, J., at p. 922 observed:
Before concluding this judgment I must refer to some of the speeches 
made by the members of the Constituent Assembly in the course of 
debates on the draft Constitution. These speeches cannot be used as aids 
for interpreting the Constitution-see State of Travancore Cochin and Ors. 
v. Bombay Co. Ltd. [1952] S.C.R. 1112. Accordingly I do not rely on 
them as aids to construction. But I propose to refer to them, as Shri A.K. 
Sen relied heavily on the speeches of Dr. B.R. Ambedkar. According to 
him, the speeches of Dr. Ambedkar show that he did not regard the 
fundamental rights as amendable. This contention is not supported by the 
speeches....
196. In H.H. Maharajadhiraja Madhav Rao v. Union of India [1971] 3 S.C.R. 9 Shah, J., 
in the course of the judgment made a brief reference to what was said by the Minister of 
Home Affairs, who was in charge of the States, when he moved for the adoption of 
Article 291. He referred to this portion of the speech for the purpose of showing the 
historical background and the circumstances which necessitated giving certain guarantees 
to the former rulers.
197. It is true that Mitter, J., in the dissenting judgment, at p. 121, used the debates for the 
purposes of interpreting Article 363 but he did not discuss the point whether it is 
permissible to do so or not.
198. In Union of India v. H.S. Dhillon, [1972] 2 S.C.R. 33 I, on behalf of the majority, 
before referring to the speeches observed at p. 58 that "we are, however, glad to find from 
the following extracts from the debates that our interpretation accords with what was 
intended." There is no harm in finding confirmation of one's interpretation in debates but 
it is quite a different thing to interpret the provisions of the Constitution in the light of the 
debates.
199. There is an additional reason for not referring to debates for the purpose of 
interpretation. The Constitution, as far as most of the Indian States were concerned, came 
into operation only because of the acceptance by the Ruler or Rajpramukh. This is borne 
out by the following extract from the statement of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel in the 
Constituent Assembly on October 12, 1949 (C.A.D. Vol. X, pp. 161-3):
Unfortunately we have no properly constituted Legislatures in the rest of 
the States (apart from Mysore, Saurashtra and Travancore and Cochin 
Union) nor will it be possible to have Legislatures constituted in them 
before the Constitution of India emerges in its final form. We have, 
therefore, no option but to make the Constitution operative in these States 
on the basis of its acceptance by the Ruler of the Rajpramukh, as the case 
may be, who will no doubt consult his Council of Ministers.
200. In accordance with this statement, declarations were issued by the Rulers or 
Rajpramukhs accepting the Constitution.
201. It seems to me that when a Ruler or Rajpramukh or the people of the State accepted 
the Constitution of India in its final form, he did not accept it subject to the speeches 
made during the Constituent Assembly debates. The speeches can, in my view, be relied 
on only in order to see if the course of the progress of a particular provision or provisions 
throws any light on the historical background or shows that a common understanding or 
agreement was arrived at between certain sections of the people. (See In re. The 
Regulation and Control of Aeronautics in Canada) [1932] A.C. 54 at p. 70.
202. In this connection reference was made to Article 305 of the draft Constitution which 
provided that notwithstanding anything contained in Article 304 of the Constitution, the 
provisions of the Constitution relating to the reservation of seats for the Muslims etc., 
shall not be amended during the period of ten years from the commencement of the 
Constitution. Although this draft Article 305 has no counterpart in our Constitution, it 
was sought to be urged that this showed that every provision of the Constitution was 
liable to be amended. I have come to the conclusion that every provision is liable to be 
amended subject to certain limitations and this argument does not affect my conclusion as 
to implied limitations.
203. A very important decision of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in The 
Bribery Commissioner v. Pedrick Ranasinghe [1965] A.C. 172 throws considerable light 
on the topic under discussion. The import of this decision was not realised by this Court 
in Golak Nath's [1967] 2 S.C.R. 762 case. Indeed, it is not referred to by the minority in 
its judgments, and Subba Rao, C.J., makes only a passing reference to it. In order to fully 
appreciate the decision of the Privy Council it is necessary to set out the relevant 
provisions of the Ceylon Independence Order in Council, 1947, hereinafter referred to as 
the Ceylon Constitution.
204. Part III of the Ceylon Constitution deals with "Legislature". Section 7 provides that 
"there shall be a Parliament of the Island which shall consist of His Majesty, and two 
Chambers to be known respectively as the Senate and the House of Representatives.
205. Section 18 deals with voting. It reads:
18. Save as otherwise provided in Sub-section (4) of Section 29, any 
question proposed for decision by either Chamber shall be determined by 
a majority of votes of the Senators or Members, as the case may be, 
present and voting. The President or Speaker or other person presiding 
shall not vote in the first instance but shall have and exercise a casting 
vote in the event of an equality of votes.
206. Section 29 deals with the power of Parliament to make laws. It reads:
29(1) Subject to the provisions of this Order, Parliament shall have power 
to make laws for the peace, order and good government of the Island.
(2) No such law shall-
(a) prohibit or restrict the free exercise of any religion, or
(b) make persons of any community or religion liable to 
disabilities or restrictions to which persons or other 
communities or religions are not made liable; or
(c) confer on persons of any community or religion any 
privilege or advantage which is not conferred on persons of 
other communities or religions; or
(d) alter the Constitution of any religious body except with 
the consent of the governing authority of that body. So, 
however, that in any case where a religious body is 
incorporated by law, no such alteration shall be made 
except at the request of the governing authority of that 
body.
Provided, however, that the preceding provisions of this 
subsection shall not apply to any law making provision for, 
relating to, or connected with the, election of Members of 
the House of Representatives, to represent persons 
registered as citizens of Ceylon under the Indian & 
Pakistani Residents (Citizenship Act).
This proviso shall cease to have effect on a date to be fixed 
by the Governor-General by Proclamation published in the 
Gazette.
(3) Any law made in contravention of Sub-section (2) of this section shall, 
to the extent of such contravention, be void.
(4) In the exercise of its powers under this section, Parliament may amend 
or repeal any of the provisions of this Order, or of any other Order of Her 
Majesty in Council in its application to the Island:
Provided that no Bill for the amendment or repeal of any of 
the Provisions of this Order shall be presented for the Royal 
Assent unless it has endorsed on it a certificate under hand 
of the Speaker that the number of votes cast in favour 
thereof in the House of Representatives amounted to not 
less than twothirds of the whole number of members of the 
House (including those not present).
Every certificate of the Speaker under this sub-section shall 
be conclusive for all purposes and shall not be questioned 
in any court of law.
207. According to Mr. Palkhivala, Section 29(1) corresponds to Articles 245 and 246, 
and Section 29(4) corresponds to Article 368 of our Constitution, and Sections 29(2) and 
29(3) correspond to Article 13(2) of our Constitution, read with fundamental rights.
208. The question which arose before the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council was 
whether Section 41 of the Bribery Amendment Act, 1958 contravened Section 29(4) of 
the Ceylon Constitution, and was consequently invalid. The question arose out of the 
following facts. The respondent, Ranasinghe, was prosecuted for a bribery offence before 
the Bribery Tribunal created by the Bribery Amendment Act, 1958. The Tribunal 
sentenced him to a term of imprisonment and fine. The Supreme Court on appeal 
declared the conviction and orders made against him null and inoperative on the ground 
that the persons composing the Tribunal were not validly appointed to the Tribunal.
209. Section 52 of the Ceylon Constitution provided for the appointment of the Chief 
Justice and Puisne Judges of the Supreme Court. Section 53 dealt with the setting up of 
the Judicial Service Commission, consisting of the Chief Justice, a Judge of the Supreme 
Court, and one other person who shall be, or shall have been, a Judge of the Supreme 
Court. It further provided that no person shall be appointed as, or shall remain, a member 
of the Judicial Service Commission, if he is Senator or a Member of Parliament. Section 
55 provided for the appointment of other Judicial Officers. Section 55(1) reads:
55. (1) The appointment, transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control of 
judicial officers is hereby vested in the Judicial Service Commission.
210. The Judicial Committee deduced from these provisions thus:
Thus there is secured a freedom from political control, and it is a 
punishable offence to attempt directly or indirectly to influence any 
decision of the Commission (Section 56).
211. The Judicial Committee then described the position of the Bribery Tribunal as 
follows:
A bribery tribunal, of which there may be any number, is composed of 
three members selected from a panel (Section 42). The panel is composed 
of not more than 15 persons who are appointed by the Governor-General 
on the advice of the Minister of Justice (Section 41). The members of the 
panel are paid remuneration (Section 45).
212. The Judicial Committee held that the members of the Tribunal held judicial office 
and were judicial officers within Section 55 of the Ceylon Constitution. They found that 
there was a plain conflict between Section 55 of the Constitution and Section 41 of the 
Bribery Amendment Act under which the panel was appointed.
213. Then the Judicial Committee examined the effect of this conflict. After setting out 
Section 18, Section 29(1) and Section 29(2)(a), the Judicial Committee observed:
There follow (b), (c) and (d), which set out further entrenched religious 
and racial matters, which shall not be the subject of legislation. They 
represent the solemn balance of rights, between the citizens of Ceylon, the 
fundamental conditions on which inter se they accepted the Constitution; 
and these are, therefore unalterable under the Constitution.
(Emphasis supplied)
214. After making these observations, the Judicial Committee set out Sub-sections (3) 
and (4) of Section 29 of the Ceylon Constitution. The observations, which I have set out 
above, are strongly relied on by Mr. Palkhivala in support of his argument that Part III 
similarly entrenched various religious and racial and other matters and these represented 
solemn balance of rights between the citizens of India, the fundamental conditions on 
which inter se they accepted the Constitution of India and these are, therefore, unalterable 
under the Constitution of India.
215. Mr. Seervai, in reply, submitted that the word "entrenched" meant nothing else that 
than these provisions were subject to be amended only by the procedure prescribed in 
Section 29(4) of the Ceylon Constitution. But I am unable to accept this interpretation 
because in that sense other provisions of the Constitution were equally entrenched 
because no provision of the Ceylon Constitution could be amended without following the 
procedure laid down in Section 29(4).
216. The interpretation urged by Mr. Palkhivala dervies support in the manner the 
Judicial Committee distinguished McCawley's [1920] A.C. 691 case (McCawley v. 
King). I may set out here the observations of the Judicial Committee regarding 
McCawley's case. They observed:
It is possible now to state summarily what is the essential difference 
between the McCawley case and this case. There the legislature, having 
full power to make laws by a majority, except upon one subject that was 
not in question, passed a law which conflicted with one of the existing 
terms of its Constitution Act. It was held that this was valid legislation, 
since it must be treated as pro tanto an alteration of the Constitution, 
which was neither fundamental in the sense of being beyond change nor so 
constructed as to require any special legislative process to pass upon the 
topic dealt with.
(Emphasis supplied)
217. It is rightly urged that the expression "which was neither fundamental in the sense of 
being beyond change" has reference to Section 29(2) of the Ceylon Constitution. I have 
no doubt that the Judicial Committee held that the provisions of Section 29(2) in the 
Ceylon Constitution were unamendable. I may mention that Prof. S A de Smith in 
reviewing the book "Reflections on the Constitution and the Constituent Assembly. 
(Ceylon's Constitution) "by L.J.M. Cooray, reads the obiter dicta in Bribery 
Commissioner v. Ranasinghe [1965] A.C. 172, 193-194 indicating that certain provisions 
of the Constitution were unalterable by the prescribed amending procedure.
218. It may be that these observations are obiter but these deserve our careful 
consideration, coming as they do from the Judicial Committee.
219. Why did the Judicial Committee say that the provisions of Section 29(2) were 
"unalterable under the Constitution" or "fundamental in the sense of being beyond 
change" ? There is nothing in the language of Section 29(4) to indicate any limitations on 
the power of the Ceylon Parliament. It could "amend or repeal" any provision of the 
Constitution, which included Section 29(2) and Section 29(4) itself. The reason could 
only be an implied limitation on the power to amend under Section 29(4) deducible from 
"the solemn balance of rights between the citizens of Ceylon, the fundamental conditions 
on which inter se they accepted the Constitution". Unless there was implied a limitation 
on the exercise of the amending power under Section 29(4), Section 29(4) could itself be 
amended to make it clear that Section 29(2) is amendable.
220. This case furnishes an exact example where implied limitations on the power to 
amend the Constitution have been inferred by no less a body than the Judicial Committee 
of the Privy Council.
221. Mr. Seervai relied on the portion within brackets of the following passage at pp. 
197-198:
These passages show clearly that the Board in McCawley's case took the 
view which commends itself to the Board in the present case, that (a 
legislature has no power to ignore the conditions of law-making that are 
imposed by the instrument which itself regulates its powers to make law. 
This restriction exists independently of the question whether the 
legislature is sovereign, as is the legislature of Ceylon, or whether the 
Constitution is "uncontrolled," as the Board held the Constitution of 
Queensland to be. Such a Constitution can, indeed, be altered or amended 
by the legislature, if the regulating instrument so provides that if the terms 
of those provisions are compiled with and the alteration or amendment 
may include the change or abolition of those very provisions.) But the 
proposition which is not acceptable is that a legislature, once established, 
has some inherent power derived from the mere fact of its establishment to 
make a valid law by the resolution of a bare majority which its own 
constituent instrument has said shall not be a valid law unless made by a 
different type of majority or by a different legislative process. And this is 
the proposition which is in reality involved in the argument.
222. The portion, not within brackets, which has been omitted in Mr. Seervai's written 
submissions, clearly shows that the Judicial Committee in this passage was not dealing 
with the amendment of Section 29(2) of the Ceylon Constitution and had understood 
McCawley's [1920] A.C. 691 case as not being concerned with the question of the 
amendment of a provision like Section 29(2) of the Ceylon Constitution. This passage 
only means that a legislature cannot disregard the procedural conditions imposed on it by 
the constituent instrument prescribing a particular majority but may amend them if the 
constituent instrument gives that power.
223. The next passage, a part of which I have already extracted, which deals with the 
difference between McCawley's case and Ranasinghe's [1965] A.C. 172, 193-194 case 
shows that the Judicial Committee in the passage relied on was dealing with the 
procedural part of Section 29(4) of Ceylon Constitution. It reads:
It is possible now to state summarily what is the essential difference 
between the McCawley case and this case. There the legislature having 
full power to make laws by a majority, except upon one subject that was 
not in question, passed a law which conflicted with one of the existing 
terms of the Constitution Act. It was held that this was valid legislation, 
since it must be treated as pro tanto an alteration of the Constitution, 
which was neither fundamental in the sense of being beyond change nor so 
constructed as to require any special legislative process to pass upon the 
topic dealt with. In the present case, on the other hand, the legislature has 
purported to pass a law which being in conflict with Section 55 of the 
Order in Council, must be treated, if it is to be valid, as an implied 
alteration of the Constitutional provisions about the appointment of 
judicial officers. Since such alterations, even if express, can only be made 
by laws which comply with the special legislative procedure laid down in 
Section 29(4), the Ceylon legislature has not got the general power to 
legislate so as to amend its Constitution by ordinary majority resolutions, 
such as the Queensland legislature was found to have under Section 2 of 
its Constitution Act, but is rather in the position, for effecting such 
amendments, that that legislature was held to be in by virtue of its Section 
9, namely, compelled to operate a special procedure in order to achieve the 
desired result.
224. I may mention that the Judicial Committee while interpreting the British North 
America Act, 1867 had also kept in mind the preservation of the rights of minorities for 
they say In re The Regulation and Control of Aeronautics in Canada: [1933] A.C. 54 at p. 
70 "inasmuch as the Act (British North America Act) embodies a compromise under 
which the original Provinces agreed to federate, it is important to keep in mind that the 
preservation of the rights of minorities was a conditioin on which such minorities entered 
into the federation, and the foundation upon which the whole structure was subsequently 
erected. The process of interpretation as the years go on ought not to be allowed to dim or 
to whittle down the provisions of the original contract upon which the federation was 
founded, nor is it legitimate that any judicial construction of the Provisions of Sections 91 
and 92 should impose a new and different contract upon the federating bodies.
225. The words of the Judicial Committee in Ranasinghe's case, are apposite and 
pregnant. "They represent the solemn balance of rights between the citizens of Ceylon, 
the fundamental conditions on which inter se they accepted the Constitution and these 
are, therefore unalterable under the Constitution." It is true that the Judicial Committee in 
the context of minorities and religious rights in Ceylon used the word "unalterable". But 
the India context is slightly different. The guarantee of fundamental rights extends to 
numerous rights and it could not have been intended that all of them would remain 
completely unalterable even if Article 1.3(2) of the Constitution be taken to include 
Constitutional amendments. A more reasonable inference to be drawn from the whole 
scheme of the Constitution is that some other meaning of "Amendment" is most 
appropriate. This conclusion is also reinforced by the concession of the Attorney-General 
and Mr. Seervai that the whole Constitution cannot be abrogated or repealed and a new 
one substituted. In other words, the expression "Amendment of this Constitution" does 
not include a revision of the whole Constitution. If this is true-I say that the concession 
was rightly made-then which is that meaning of the word "Amendment" that is most 
appropriate and fits in with the while scheme of the Constitution. In my view that 
meaning would be appropriate which would enable the country to achieve a social and 
economic revolution without destroying the democratic structure of the Constitution and 
the basic inalienable rights guaranteed in Part III and without going outside the contours 
delineated in the Preamble.
226. I come to the same conclusion by another line of reasoning. In a written Constitution 
it is rarely that everything is said expressly. Powers and limitations are implied from 
necessity or the scheme of the Constitution. I will mention a few instances approved by 
the Judicial Committee and this Court and other Courts. I may first consider the doctrine 
that enables Parliament to have power to deal with ancillary and subsidiary matters, 
which strictly do not fall within the legislative entry with respect to which legislation is 
being undertaken.
227. Lefroy in "A short Treatise on Canadian Constitutional Law" (page 94), puts the 
matter thus:
But when it is (Dominion Parliament) is legislating upon the enumerated 
Dominion subject-matters of Section 91 of the Federation Act, it is held 
that the Imperial Parliament, by necessary implication, intended to confer 
on it legislative power to interfere with, deal with, and encroach upon, 
matters otherwise assigned to the provincial legislatures under Section 92, 
so far as a general law relating to those subjects may affect them, as it may 
also do to the extent of such ancillary provisions as may be required to 
prevent the scheme of such a law from being defeated. The Privy Council 
has established and illustrated this in many decisions.
228. This acts as a corresponding limitation on the legislative power of the Provincial or 
State legislatures.
229. This Court has in numerous decisions implied similar powers. (See Orient Paper 
Mills v. State of Orissa [1962] 1. S.C.R. 549; Burmah Construction Co. v. State of Orissa 
[1962] 1 Supp. S.C.R. 242; Navnit Lal Javeri v. Appellate Assistant Commissioner A.I.R. 
1965 S.C. 1375; to mention a few).
230. It often happens that what has been implied by courts in one Constitution is 
expressly conferred in another Constitution. For instance, in the Constitution of the 
United States, Clause 18 of Section 8 expressly grants incidental powers:
The Congress shall have power...to make all laws which shall be necessary 
and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers and all other 
powers vested by this Constitution in the government of the United States, 
or in any department or officer thereof.
231. It would not be legitimate to argue from the above express provision in the United 
States Constitution that if the Constitution-makers wanted to give such powers to the 
Parliament of India they would have expressly conferred incidental powers.
232. Story says that Clause 18 imports no more than would remit from necessary 
implication (see pp. 112 and 113, Vol. 3) if it had not been expressly inserted.
233. In Ram Jawaya Kapur v. State of Punjab [1955] 2 S.C.R. 225; 236-37 this Court 
implied that "the President has thus been made a formal or Constitutional head of the 
executive and the real executive powers are vested in the Ministers or the Cabinet. The 
same provisions obtain in regard to the Government of States; the Governor or the 
Rajpramukh....
234. In Sanjeevi Naidu v. State of Madras [1970] 1 S.C.C. 443 Hedge, J., held that the 
Governor was essentially a Constitutional head and the administration of State was run 
by the Council of Ministers.
235. Both these cases were followed by another Constitution bench in U.N.R. Rao v. 
Smt. Indira Gandhi [1971] 2 S.C.C. 63.
236. This conclusion constitutes an implied limitation on the powers of the President and 
the GovernOrs. The Court further implied in Ram Jawaya Kapur's [1955] 2 S.C.R. 225; 
236-37 case that the Government could without specific legislative sanction carry on 
trade and business.
237. To save time we did not hear Mr. Seervai on the last 3 cases just cited. I have 
mentioned them only to give another example.
238. It may be noted that what was implied regarding carrying on trade was made an 
express provision in the Constitution by the Constitution (Seventh Amendment) Act, 
1956, when a new Article 298 was substituted. The Federal Court and the Supreme Court 
of India have recognised and applied this principle in other cases:
(i) "A grant of the power in general terms standing by itself would no 
doubt be construed in the wider sense; but it may be qualified by other 
express provisions in the same enactment, by the implications of the 
context, and even by considerations arising out of what appears to be the 
general scheme of the Act." (Per Gwyer C.J. The C.J. & Berar Act-1939 
F.C.R. 18 at 42).
(ii) Before its amendment in 1955, Article 31(2) was read as containing an 
implied limitation that the State could acquire only for a public purpose 
(the Fourth Amendment expressly enacted this limitation in 1955).
(a) "One limitation imposed upon acquisition or taking 
possession of private property which is implied in the 
clause is that such taking must be for public purpose". (Per 
Mukherjea J. Chiranjitlal Chowdhuri v. Union of India 
1950 SCR 869 at 902),
(b) "The existence of a 'public purpose' is undoubtedly an 
implied condition of the exercise of compulsory powers of 
acquisition by the State...." (Per Mahajan J. State of Bihar 
v. Makarajadhiraja of Darbhanga 1952 SCR 889 at 934).
(iii) The Supreme Court has laid down that there is an implied limitation 
on legislative power: the Legislature cannot delegate the essentials of the 
legislative functions.
...the legislature cannot part with its essential legislative function which 
consists in declaring its policy and making it a binding rule of 
conduct...the limits of the powers of delegation in India would therefore 
have to be ascertained as a matter of construction from the provisions of 
the Constitution itself and as I have said the right of delegation may be 
implied in the exercise of legislative power only to the extent that it is 
necessary to make the exercise of the power effective and complete. (Per 
Mukherjea J. in re The Delhi Laws Act-\95\SCR 747 at 984-5).
The same implied limitation on the Legislature, in the field of delegation, 
has been invoked and applied in:
Raj Narain Singh v. Patna Administration 1955(1) SCR 290. Hari Shankar 
Bagla v. State of Madhya Pradesh 1955(1) SCR 380.
Vasantilal Sanjanwala v. State of Bombay 1961(1) SCR 341. The 
Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Birla Cotton Mills 1968(3) SCR 251.
Garewal v. State of Punjab 1959 Supp. (1) SCR 792.
(iv) On the power confered by Articles 3 and 4 of the Constitution to form 
a new State and amend the Constitution for that purpose limitation has 
been implied that the new State must-
conform to the democratic pattern envisaged by the 
Constitution; and the power which the Parliament may 
exercise...is not the power to over-ride the Constitutional 
scheme. No State can therefore be formed, admitted or set 
up by law under Article 4 by the Parliament which has no 
effective legislative, executive and judicial organs. (Per 
Shah J.-Mangal Singh v. Union of India 1967(2) SCR 109 
at 112.
(Emphasis supplied)
239. It would have been unnecessary to refer to more authorities but for the fact that it 
was strenuously urged that there could not be any implied limitations resulting from the 
scheme of the Constitution.
240. Before referring to a recent decision of the Australian High Court, observations in 
certain earlier cases may be reproduced here:
Since the Engineers" case (1920-28 CLR 129) a notion seems to have 
gained currency that in interpreting the Constitution no implications can 
be made. Such a method of construction would defeat the intention of any 
instrument, but of all instruments, a written Constitution seems the last to 
which it could be applied. I do not think that the judgment of the majority 
of the court in the Engineers' case meant to propound such a doctrine" (Per 
Dixon J. West v. Commissioner of Taxation (New South Wales)-56 CLR 
657 at 681-2).
Some implications are necessary from the structure of the Constitution 
itself, but it is inevitable also, I should think, that these implications can 
only be defined by a gradual process of judicial decision" (Per Starke J., 
South Australia v. Commonwealth 65 CLR 373, 447.
(Emphasis supplied)
The Federal character of the Australian Constitution carries implications 
of its own.... Therefore it is beyond the power of either to abolish or 
destroy the other". (Per Starke J. Melbourne Corporation v. 
Commonwealth 74 CLR 31 at 70).
(Emphasis supplied)
The Federal system itself is the foundation of the restraint upon the use of 
the power to control the State...Restraints to be implied against any 
exercise of power by Commonwealth against State and State against 
Commonwealth calculated to destroy or detract from the independent 
exercise of the functions of the one or the other...." (Per Dixon J.-
Melbourne Corporation v. Commonwealth 74 CLR 31 at 81-2).
241. I may now refer to State of Victoria v. The Commonwealth [1971] 45 A.L.R.J. 251; 
252; 253 which discusses the question of implications to be drawn from a Constitution 
like the Australian Constitution which is contained in the Commonwealth Act. It gives 
the latest view of that Court on the subject.
242. The point at issue was whether the Commonwealth Parliament, in the exercise of its 
power under Section 51(ii) of the Constitution (subject to the Constitution, to make laws 
with respect to taxation, but so as not to discriminate between States or parts of States) 
may include the Crown in right of a State in the operation of a law imposing a tax or 
providing for the assessment of a tax.
243. Another point at issue was the status of the Commonwealth and the States under the 
Constitution, and the extent to which the Commonwealth Parliament may pass laws 
binding on the States, considered generally and historically, and with particular reference 
to the question whether there is any implied limitation on Commonwealth legislative 
power. It is the discussion on the latter question that is relevant to the present case.
244. There was difference of opinion among the Judges. Chief Justice Barwick held as 
follows:
The basic principles of construction of the Constitution were definitively 
enunciated by the Court in Amalgamated Society of Engineers v. Adelaide 
Steamship Co. Ltd. (1920), 28 C.L.R. 129 (the Engineers' case) Lord 
Selborne's language in Reg. v. Burah (1878) 3 App. Cas. 889 at pp. 904-
905, was accepted and applied as was that of Earl Loreburn in Attorney-
General for Ontario v. Attorney-General for Canada (1912) A.C. at 583.
245. According to the Chief Justice, the Court in Engineeres' case unequivocally rejected 
the doctrine that there was an "implied prohibition" in the Constitution against the 
exercise in relation to a State of a legislative power of the Commonwealth once 
ascertained in accordance with the ordinary rules of construction, a doctrine which had 
theretofore been entertained and sought to be founded upon some supposed necessity of 
"protection", as it were, "against the aggression of some outside and possibly hostile 
body". The Court emphasized that if protection against an abuse of power were needed, it 
must be provided by the electorate and not by the judiciary. 'The one clear line of judicial 
inquiry as to the meaning of the Constitution must be to read it naturally in the light of 
the circumstances in which it was made, with knowledge of the combined fabric of the 
common law, and the statute law which preceded it and then lucet ipsa per see.
246. Now this is the judgment which is relied on by Mr. Seervai and the learned Attorney 
General. On the other hand, reliance is placed by Mr. Palkhivala on Menzies J's 
judgment:
Does the fact that the Constitution is "federal" carry with it implications 
limiting the law-making powers of the Parliament of the Commonwealth 
with regard to the States ?
To this question I have no doubt, both on principle and on authority, that 
an affirmative answer must be given. A Constitution providing for an 
indissoluble federal Commonwealth must protect both Commonwealth 
and States. The States are not outside the Constitution. They are States of 
the Commonwealth; Section 106. Accordingly, although the Constitution 
does, clearly enough, subject the States to laws made by the Parliament, it 
does so with some limitation.
247. After making these observations, the learned Judge examined authorities and he 
found support in Malbourne Corporation v. The Commonwealth [1947] 74 C.L.R. 31, He 
then examined various other cases in support of the above principles.
248. The other passages relied on by the petitioners from the judgments of the other 
learned Judges on the Bench in that case are as follows:
Windeyar, J.
In each case an implication means that something not expressed is to be 
understood. But in the one case, this involves an addition to what is 
expressed : in the other it explains, perhaps limits, the effect of what is 
expressed. It is in the latter sense that in my view of the matter, 
implications have a place in the interpretation of the Constitution : and I 
consider it is the sense that Dixon J. intended when in Australian National 
Airways Pty. Ltd. v. The Commonwealth (1945) 71 C.L.R. 29, he said (at 
p. 85) : "We should avoid pedantic and narrow constructions in dealing 
with an instrument of government and I do not see why we should be 
fearful about making implications". His Honour, when Chief Justice, 
repeated this observation in Lamshed v. Lake (1958) 99 C.L.R. 132 at p. 
144. I said in Spratt v. Hermes (1965) 114 C.L.R. 226, at p. 272, that it is 
well to remember it. I still think so. The only emendation that I would 
venture is that I would prefer not to say "making implications", because 
our avowed task is simply the revealing or uncovering of implications that 
are already there.
In Malbourne Corporation v. The Commonwealth (1947) 74 C.L.R. 31, 
Starke J. said (at p. 70) : "The federal character of the Australian 
Constitution carries implications of its own....
* * * * *
249. "The position that I take is this : The several subject matters with respect to which 
the Commonwealth is empowered by the Constitution to make laws for the peace, order 
and good government of the Conmmon-wealth are not to be narrowed or limited by 
implications. Their scope and amplitude depend simply on the words by which they are 
expressed. But implications arising from the existence of the States as parts of the 
Commonwealth and as constituents of the federation may restrict the manner in which the 
Parliament can lawfully exercise its power to make laws with respect to a particular 
subject-matter. These implications, or perhaps it were better to say underlying 
assumptions of the Constitution, relate to the use of a power not to the inherent nature of 
the subject matter of the law. Of course whether or not a law promotes peace, order and 
good government is for the Parliament, not for a court, to decide. But a law although it be 
with respect to a designated subject matter, cannot be for the peace, order and good 
government of the Commonwealth if it be directed to the States to prevent their carrying 
out their functions as parts of the Commonwealth....
* * * * *
Gibbs, J.
The ordinary principles of statutory construction do not preclude the 
making of implications when these are necessary to give effect to the 
intention of the legislature as revealed in the statute as a whole. The 
intention of the Imperial legislature in enacting the Constitution Act was 
to give effect to the wish of the Australian people to join in a federal union 
and the purpose of the Constitution was to establish a federal, and not a 
unitary, system for the government of Australia and accordingly to 
provide for the distribution of the powers of government between the 
Commonwealth and the States who were to be the constituent members of 
the federation. In some respects the Commonwealth was placed in a 
position of supremacy, as the national interest required, but it would be 
inconsistent with the very basis of the federation that the Commonwealth's 
powers should extend to reduce the States to such a position of 
subordination that their very existence, or at least their capacity to function 
effectually as independent units, would be dependent upon the manner in 
which the Commonwealth exercised its powers, rather than on the legal 
limits of the powers themselves. Thus, the purpose of the Constitution, and 
the scheme by which it is intended to be given effect, necessarily give rise 
to implications as to the manner in which the Commonwealth and the 
States respectively may exercise their powers, vis-a-vis each other....
250. Wynes(Wynes Legislative, Executive and Judicial Power in Australia, Fourth Edn. 
p. 503) in discussing the amendment of the Constitutions of the States of Australia sums 
up the position thus. I may refer only to the propositions which are relevant to our case.
(1) Every State legislature has by virtue of Section 5 full powers of 
amendment of any provision respecting its Constitution powers and 
procedures.
(2) But it cannot (semble) alter its "representative" character.
(3) The "Constitution" of a Legislature means its composition, form or 
nature of the House or Houses, and excludes any reference to the Crown.
* * * * *
(6) No Colonial Legislature can forever abrogate its power of amendment 
and thereby render its Constitution absolutely immutable. A law 
purporting to effect this object would be void under Section 2 of the Act as 
being repugnant to Section 5 thereof.
251. For proposition (2) above, reference is made in the footnote to Taylor v. The 
Attorney-General of Queensland. 23 C.L.R. 457 The relevant passages which bear out the 
second proposition are:
I take the Constitution of a legislature, as the term is here used, to mean 
the composition, form or nature of the House of Legislature where there is 
only one House, or of either House if the legislative body consists of two 
Houses. Probably the power does not extend to authorize the elimination 
of the reprsentative character of the legislature within the meaning of the 
Act. (p. 468 per-Barton J.).
I read the words "Constitution of such legislature" as including the change 
from a unicameral to a bicameral system, or the reverse. Probably the 
"representative" character of the legislature is-a basic condition of the 
power relied on, and is preserved by the word "such," but, that being 
maintained, I can see no reason for cutting down the plain natural meaning 
of the words in question so as to exclude the power of a self-governing 
community to say that for State purposes one House is sufficient as its 
organ of legislation." (p. 474 per-Issacs J.).
(For proposition No. 3, see Taylor v. The Attorney-General of Queensland 
23 C.L.R. 457 and Clayton v. Heffron.) [1960] 105 C.L.R. 214; 251.
252. Then dealing with the Commonwealth Constitution, he states:
Another suggested limitation is based upon the distinction between the 
covering sections of the Constitution Act and the Constitution itself; it is 
admitted on all sides that Section 128 does not permit of any amendment 
to those sections. (And in this respect the Statute of Westminster does not 
confer any new power of amendment-indeed it is expressly provided that 
nothing in the statute shall be deemed to confer any power to repeal or 
alter the Constitution of the Constitution Act otherwise than accordance 
with existing law.) In virtue of their character of Imperial enactments the 
covering sections of the Constitution are alterable only by the Imperial 
Parliament itself. The question is, admitting this principle, how far does 
the Constitution Act operate as a limitation upon the amending power ? It 
has been suggested that any amendment which would be inconsistent with 
the preamble of the Act referring to the 'indissoluble' character and the 
sections which refer to the "Federal" nature of the Constitution, would be 
invalid. There has been much conflict of opinion respecting this matter; 
the view here taken is that the preamble in no wise effects the power of 
alteration. 
253. In view of this conflict, no assistance can be derived from academic writing.
254. The case of The Attorney General of Nova Scotia and The Attorney General of 
Canada and Lord Nelson Hotel Company Limited [1951] S.C.R.-Canada-31 furnishes 
another example where limitations were implied. The Legislature of the Province of 
Nova Scotia contemplated passing an act respecting the delegation of jurisdiction of the 
Parliament of Canada to the Legislature of Nova Scotia and vice versa. The question 
arose whether, if enacted, the bill would be constiutionally valid since it contemplated 
delegation by Parliament of powers, exclusively vested in it by Section 91 of the British 
North America Act to the Legislature of Nova Scotia, and delegation by that Legislature 
of powers, exclusively vested in Provincial Legislature under Section 92 of the Act, to 
Parliament.
255. The decision of the Court is summarised in the headnote as follows:
The Parliament of Canada and each Provincial Legislature is a sovereign 
body within the sphere, possessed of exclusive jurisdiction to legislate 
with regard to the subject matters assigned to it under Section 91 or 
Section 92, as the case may be. Neither is capable therefore of delegating 
to the other the powers with which it has been vested nor of the receiving 
from the other the powers with which the other has been vested.
256. The Chief Justice observed:
The Constitution of Canada does not belong either to Parliament, or to the 
Legislatures; it belongs to the country and it is there that the citizens of the 
country will find the protection of the rights to which they are entitled. It 
is part of that protection that Parliament can legislate only on the subject 
matters referred to it by Section 91 and that each Province can legislate 
exclusively on the subject matters referred to it by Section 92. 
257. He further observed:
Under the scheme of the British North America Act there were to be, in 
the words of Lord Atkin in The Labour Conventions Reference (1937) 
A.C. 326)", "Water-tight compartments which are an essential part of the 
original structure.
258. He distinguished the cases of In re Gray [1918] 57 Can. S.C.R. 150 and The 
Chemical Reference [1943] S.C.R. 1-Canada by observing that delegations such as were 
dealt with in these cases were "delegations to a body subordinate to Parliament and were 
of a character different from the delegation meant by the Bill now submitted to the Court.
259. Kerwin, J., referred to the reasons of their Lordships in In Re The Initiative and 
Referendum [1919] A.C. 935 Act as instructive. After referring to the actual decision of 
that case, he referred to the observations of Lord Haldane, which I have set out later 
while dealing with the Initiative & Referendum case and then held:
The British North America Act divides legislative jurisdiction between the 
Parliament of Canada and the Legislatures of the Provinces and there is no 
way in which these bodies may agree to a different division. 
260. Taschereau, J., observed:
It is a well settled proposition of law that jurisdiction cannot be conferred 
by consent None of these bodies can be vested directly or indirectly with 
powers which have been denied them by the B.N.A. Act, and which 
therefore are not within their Constitutional jurisdiction. 
261. He referred to a number of authorities which' held that neither the Dominion nor the 
Province can delegate to each other powers they do not expressly possess under the 
British North America Act. He distinguished cases like Hodge v. The Queen (1883) 9, 
App. Cas. 117. In Re Gray, (57) Can. S.C.R. 150. Shannon v. Lower Mainland Dairy 
Products Board, [1938] A.C. 708 and Chemicals Reference [1943] S.C.R. 1-Canada by 
observing:
In all these cases of delegation, the authority delegated its powers to 
subordinate Boards for the purpose of carrying legislative enactments into 
operation.
262. Justice Rand emphasized that delegation implies subordination and subordination 
implies duty.
263. Justice Fauteux, as he then was, first referred to the following observations of Lord 
Atkin in Attorney General for Canada v. Attorney General for Ontario [1937] A.C. 326, 
351:
No one can doubt that this distribution (of powers) is one of the most 
essential conditions, probably the most essential condition, in the inter-
provincial compact to which the British North America Act gives effect.
264. He then observed:
In the result, each of the provinces, enjoying up to the time of the union, 
within their respective areas, and quoad one another, an independent, 
exclusive and over-all legislative authority, surrender to and charged the 
Parliament of Canada with the responsibility and authority to make laws 
with respect to what was then considered as matters of common interest to 
the whole country and retained and undertook to be charged with the 
responsibility and authority to make laws with respect to local matters in 
their respective sections. This is the system of government by which the 
Fathers of Confederation intended-and their intentions were implemented 
in the Act-to "protect the diversified interests of the several provinces and 
secure the efficiency, harmony and permanency in the working of the 
union.
265. In the case just referred to, the Supreme Court of Canada implied a limitation on the 
power of Parliament and the Legislatures of the Provinces to delegate legislative power to 
the other although there was no express limitation, in terms, in Sections 91 and 92 of the 
Canadian Constitution. This case also brings out the point that delegation of law makng 
power can only be to a subordinate body. Apply the ratio of this decision to the present 
case, it cannot be said that the State Legislatures or Parliament acting in its ordinary 
legislative capacity, are subordinate bodies to Parliament acting under Article 368 of the 
Constitution. Therefore it is impermissible for Parliament under Article 368 to delegate 
its functions of amending the Constitution to either the State legislatures or to its ordinary 
legislative capacity. But I will refer to this aspect in greater detail later when I refer to the 
case In re the Initiative and Referendum Act.
266. In Canada some of the Judges have implied that freedom of speech and freedom of 
the Press cannot be abrogated by Parliament or Provincial legislatures from the words in 
the Preamble to the Canadian Constitution i.e. "with a Constitution similar in principle to 
that of the United Kingdom." Some of these observations are:
Although it is not necessary, of course, to determine this question for the 
purposes of the present appeal, the Canadian Constitution being declared 
to be similar in principle to that of the United Kingdom, I am also of 
opinion that as our Constitutional Act now stands, Parliament itself could 
not abrogate this right of discussion and debate." (Per Abbot J. Switzmen 
v. Elbling 1957-Can. S.C. 285 at 328).
I conclude further that the opening paragraph of the preamble to the 
B.N.A. Act 1867 which provided for a 'Constitution similar in principle to 
that of the United Kingdom', thereby adopted the same Constitutional 
principles and hence Section 1025A is contrary to the Canadian 
Constitution, and beyond the competence of Parliament or any provincial 
legislature to enact so long as our Constitution remains in its present from 
of a Constitutional democracy." (Per O'Halloran J.A.-Rex v. Hess 1949 4 
D.L.R. 199 at 208).
In Re Alberta Legislation, (1938) 2 D.L.R. 81, S.C.R. 100, Sir Lyman P. 
Dutt C.J.C. deals with this matter. The proposed legislation did not 
attempt to prevent discussion of affairs in newspapers but rather to compel 
the publication of statements as to the true and exact objects of 
Governmental policy and as to the difficulties of achieving them. Quoting 
the words of Lord Wright M.R. in James v. Commonwealth of Australia, 
(1936) A.C. 578 at p. 627 freedom of discussion means "'freedom 
governed by law'" he says at p. 107 D.L.R., p. 133 S.C.R. : "It is axiomatic 
that the practice of this right of free public discussion of public affairs, 
notwithstanding its incidental mischiefs, is the breath of life for 
parliamentary institutions.
He deduces authority to protect it from the principle that the "powers 
requisite for the preservation of the Constitution arise by a necessary 
implication of the Confederation Act as a whole." (Per Rand J.-Samur v. 
City of Quebec (1953) 4 D.L.R. 641 at 671).
(Emphasis supplied)
267. It is, however, noteworthy that the Solicitor-General appearing on behalf of the 
Union of India conceded that implications can arise from a Constitution, but said that no 
implication necessarily arises out of the provisions of Article 368.
268. I may now refer to another decision of the Judicial Committee in Liyange's case, 
[1967] 1 A.C. 259 which was relied on by Mr. Seervai to show that an amendment of the 
Constitution cannot be held to be void on the ground of repugnancy to some vague 
ground of inconsistency with the preamble.
269. The Parliament of Ceylon effected various modifications of the Criminal Procedure 
Code by the Criminal Law (Special Provisions) Act, 1962. The appellants were convicted 
by the Supreme Court of Ceylon for various offences like conspiring to wage war against 
the Queen, etc.
270. The two relevant arguments were:
The first is that the Ceylon Parliament is limited by an inability to pass 
legislation which is contrary to fundamental principles of justice. The 
1962 Acts, it is said, are contrary to such principles in that they not only 
are directed against individuals but also ex post facto create crimes and 
punishment, and destroy fair safeguards by which those individuals would 
otherwise be protected.
The appellants' second contention is that the 1962 Acts offended against 
the Constitution in that they amounted to a direction to convict the 
appellants or to a legislative plan to secure the conviction and severe 
punishment of the appellants and thus constituted an unjustifiable 
assumption of judicial power by the legislature, or an interference with 
judicial power, which is outside the legislature's competence and is 
inconsistent with the severance of power between legislature, executive, 
and judiciary which the Constitution ordains.
271. Mr. Seervai relies on the answer to the first contention. According to Mr. Seervai, 
the answer shows that constituent power is different from legislative power and when 
constituent power is given, it is exhaustive leaving nothing uncovered.
272. The Judicial Committee after referring to passages from "The Sovereignty of the 
British Dominions" by Prof. Keith, and "The Statutes of Westminster and Dominion 
Status" by K.C. Wheare, observed at page 284:
Their Lordships cannot accept the view that the legislature while removing 
the fetter of repugnance to English law, left in existence a fetter of 
repugnance to some vague unspecified law of natural justice. The terms of 
the Colonial Laws Validity Act and especially the words "but not 
otherwise" in Section 2 make it clear that Parliament was intending to deal 
with the whole question of repugnancy....
273. The Judicial Committee referred to the Ceylon Independence Act, 1947, and ...the 
Legislative Power of Ceylon and observed:
These liberating provisions thus incorporated and enlarged the enabling 
terms of the Act of 1865, and it is clear that the joint effect of the Order in 
Council of 1946 and the Act of 1947 was intended to and did have the 
result of giving to the Ceylon Parliament the full legislative powers of a 
sovereign independent State (see Ibralebbe v. The Queen (1964) A.C. 900)
274. Mr. Seervai sought to argue from this that similarly the amending power of 
Parliament under Article 368 has no limitations and cannot be limited by some vague 
doctrine of repugnancy to natural and inalienable rights and the Preamble. We are unable 
to appreciate that any analogy exists between Mr. Palkhivala's argument and the 
argument of Mr. Gratien. Mr. Palkhivala relies on the Preamble and the scheme of the 
Constitution to interpret Article 368 and limit its operation within the contours of the 
Preamble. The Preamble of the Constitution of India does not seem to prescribe any 
vague doctrines like the law of natural justice even if the latter, contrary to many 
decisions of our Court, be considered vague.
275. The case, however, furnishes another instance where implied limitations were 
inferred. After referring to the provisions dealing with "judicature" and the Judges, the 
Board observed:
These provisions manifest an intention to secure in the judiciary a freedom 
from political, legislative and executive control. They are wholly 
appropriate in a Constitution which intends that judicial power shall be 
vested only in the judicature. They would be inappropriate in a 
Constitution by which it was intended that judicial power should be shared 
by the executive or the legislature. The Constitution's silence as to the 
vesting of judicial power is consistent with its remaining, where it had lain 
for more than a century, in the hands of the judicature. It is not consistent 
with any intention that hence-forth it should pass to or be shared by, the 
executive or the legislature.
276. The Judicial Committee was of the view that there "exists a separate power in the 
judicature which under the Constitution as it stands cannot be usurped or infringed by the 
executive or the legislature." The Judicial Committee cut down the plain words of 
Section 29(1) thus:
277. "Section 29(1) of the Constitution says:
Subject to the provisions of this Order Parliament shall have power to 
make laws for the peace order and good government of the Island". These 
words have habitually been construed in their fullest scope. Section 29(4) 
provides that Parliament may amend the Constitution on a two-thirds 
majority with a certificate of the Speaker. Their Lordships however cannot 
read the words of Section 29(1) as entitling Parliament to pass legislation 
which usurps the judicial power of the judicature-e.g., by passing an Act 
of attainder against some person or instructing a judge to bring in a verdict 
of guilty against someone who is being tried-if in law such usurpation 
would otherwise be contrary to the Constitution.
278. In conclusion the Judicial Committee held that there was interference with the 
functions of the judiciary and it was not only the likely but the intended effect of the 
impugned enactments, and that was fatal to their validity.
279. Their Lordships uttered a warning which must always be borne in dealing with 
Constitutional cases : "what is done once, if it be allowed, may be done again and in a 
lesser crisis and less serious circumstances. And thus judicial power may be eroded. Such 
an erosion is contrary to the clear intention of the Constitution." This was in reply to the 
argument that the Legislature had no such general intention to absorb judicial powers and 
it had pased the legislation because it was beset by a grave situation and it took grave 
measures to deal with it, thinking, one must presume, that it had power to do so and was 
acting rightly. According to their Lordships that consideration was irrelevant and gave no 
validity to acts which infringed the Constitution.
280. McCawley v. The King [1920] A.C. 691 was strongly relied on by Mr. Seervai. The 
case was on appeal from the decision of the High Court of Australia, reported in 26 
C.L.R. 9. Apart from the questions of interpretation of Sub-section (6), Section 6, of the 
Industrial Arbitration Act, 1916 and the construction of the Commission which was 
issued, the main question that was debated before the High Court and the Board was 
whether the Legislature of Queensland could amend a provision of the Constitution of 
Queensland without enacting a legislative enactment directly amending the Constitution. 
The respondents before the Board had contended as follows:
But an alteration to be valid must be made by direct legislative enactment. 
The Constitution can be altered but cannot be disregarded. So long as it 
subsists it is the test of the validity of legislation. The High Court of 
Australia so decided in Cooper's case [1907] 4 C.L.R. 1304.
281. The appellants, on the other hand, had contended that "the Legislature of 
Queensland has power, by ordinary enactment passed by both houses and assented to by 
the Governor in the name of the Crown, to alter the Constitution of Queensland, 
including the judicial institutions of the State, and the tenure of the judges.... All the laws 
applying to Queensland which it is competent to the Queensland Legislature to alter can 
be altered in the same manner by ordinary enactment.
282. There was difference of opinion in the High Court. Griffith, C.J., was of the opinion 
that the Parliament of Queensland could not merely by enacting a law inconsistent with 
the Constitution Act of 1867 overrule its provisions, although it might be proper 
formality pass an Act which expressly altered or repealed it. Isaacs and Rich JJ., with 
whom the Board found themselves in almost complete agreement, held to the contrary. 
The Board, in dealing with the question, first referred to the "distinction between 
Constitutions the terms of which may be modified or repealled with no other formality 
than is necessary in the case of other legislation, and Constitutions which can only be 
altered with some special formality, and in some cases by a specially convened assembly.
283. Then Lord Birkenhead, L.C., observed at page 704:
Many different terms have been employed in the text-books to distinguish 
these two constrasted forms of Constitution. Their special qualities may 
perhaps be exhibited as clearly by calling the one a controlled and the 
other an uncontrolled Constitution as by any other nomenclature. Nor is a 
Constitution debarred from being reckoned as an uncontrolled 
Constitution because it is not, like the British Constitution, constituted by 
historic development but finds its genesis in an originating document 
which may contain some conditions which cannot be altered except by the 
power which gave it birth. It is of the greatest importance to notice that 
where the Constitution is uncontrolled the consequences of its freedom 
admit of no qualification whatever. The doctrine is carried to every proper 
consequence with logical and inexorable precision, Thus when one of the 
learned Judges in the Court below said that, according to the appellant, the 
Constitution could be ignored as if it were a Dog Act, he was in effect 
merely expressing his opinion that the Constitution was, in fact, 
controlled. If it were uncontrolled, it would be an elementary 
commonplace that in the eye of the law the legislative document or 
documents which defined it occupied precisely the same position as a Dog 
Act or any other Act, however humble its subject-matter.
284. Then, the Judicial Committee proceeded to deal with the Constitution of Queensland 
and held that it was an uncontrolled Constitution. Later, their Lordships observed:
It was not the policy of the Imperial Legislature, at any relevant period, to 
shackle or control in the manner suggested the legislative powers of the 
nascent Australian Legislatures. Consistently with the genius of the British 
people what was given was given completely, and unequivocally, in the 
belief fully justified by the event, that these young communities would 
successfully work out their own Constitutional salvation. 
285. Mr. Seervai sought to deduce the following propositions from this case:
Firstly-(1) Unless there is a special procedure prescribed for amending any 
part of the Constitution, the Constitution was uncontrolled and could be 
amended by an Act in the manner prescribed for enacting ordinary laws, 
and therefore, a subsequent law inconsistent with the Constitution would 
pro tanto repeal the Constitution; 
Secondly-(2) A Constitution largely or generally uncontrolled may contain 
one or more provisions which prescribe a different procedure for 
amending them than is prescribed for amending an ordinary law, in which 
case an ordinary law cannot amend them and the procedure must be 
strictly followed if the amendment is to be effected; 
Thirdly-(3) Implications of limitation of power ought not be imported 
from general concepts but only from express or necessarily implied 
limitations (i.e. implied limitation without which a Constitution cannot be 
worked); and
Fourthly-(4) The British Parliament in granting the colonial legislatures 
power of legislation as far back as 1865-Section 2-refused to put 
limitations of vague character, like general principles of law, but limited 
those limitations to objective standards like statutes and provisions of any 
Act of Parliament or order or regulation made under the Acts of 
Parliament.
286. I agree that the first and the second propositions are deducible from McCawley's 
case but I am unable_to agree with the learned Counsel that the third proposition 
enunciated by him emerges from the case. The only implied limitation which was urged 
by the learned Counsel for the respondents was that the Queensland legislature should 
first directly amend the Constitution and then pass an act which would otherwise have 
been inconsistent if the Constitution had not been amended. It appears from the judgment 
of Isaac, J., and the Board that two South Australia Judges had earlier held that the 
legislation must be "with the object of altering the Constitution of the legislature". Lord 
Selborne, when Sir Roundell Palmer, and Sir Robert Collier expressed dissent from their 
view and recommended the enactment of a statute like the Colonial Laws Validity Act, 
1865.
287. The fourth proposition states a fact. The fact that British Parliament in 1865 refused 
to put so called vague limitations does not assist us in deciding whether there cannot be 
implied limitations on the amending power under Article 368.
288. I shall examine a little later more cases in which limitations on lawmaking power 
have been implied both in Australia, U.S.A., and in Canada. McCawley's case is authority 
only for the proposition that if the Constitution is uncontrolled then it is not necessary for 
the legislature to pass an act labelling it as an amendment of the Constitution; it can 
amend the Constitution like any other act.
289. Attorney-General for New South Wales v. Trethowan [1932] A.C. 526 was 
concerned really with the interpretation of Section 5 of the Colonial Laws Validity Act, 
1865, and its impact on the powers of the legislature of the New South Wales. The 
Constitution Act, 1902, as amended in 1929, had inserted Section 7A, the relevant part of 
which reads as follows:
7A.-(1) The Legislative Council shall not be abolished nor, subject to the 
provisions of Sub-section 6 of this section, shall its Constitution or powers 
be altered except in the manner provided in this section. (2) A Bill for any 
purpose within Sub-section 1 of this section shall not be presented to the 
Governor for His Majesty's assent until the Bill has been approved by the 
electors in accordance with this section. (5) If a majority of the electors 
voting approve the Bill, it shall be presented to the Governor for His 
Majesty's assent. (6) The provisions of this section shall extend to any Bill 
for the repeal or amendment of this section, but shall not apply to any Bill 
for the repeal or amendment of any of the following sections of this Act, 
namely, Sections 13, 14, 15, 18, 19, 20, 21 and 22.
290. Towards the end of 1930 two bills were passed by both Houses of the New South 
Wales legislature. The first Bill enacted that Section 7A above referred to was repealed, 
and the second Bill enacted by Clause 2, Sub-section 1. "The Legislative Council of New 
South Wales is abolished.
291. The contentions advanced before the Judicial Committee were:
The appellants urge : (1) That the King, with the advice and consent of the 
Legislative Council and the Legislative Assembly, had full power to enact 
a Bill repealing Section 7A.
(2) That Sub-section 6 of Section 7A of the Constitution Act is void, 
because : (a) The New South Wales Legislature has no power to shackle 
or control its successors, the New South Wales Constitution being in 
substance an uncontrolled "Constitution"; (b) It is repugnant to Section 4 
of the Constitution Statute of 1855; (c) It is repugnant to Section 5 of the 
Colonial Laws Validity Act, 1865.
For the respondents it was contended : (1) That Section 7A was a valid 
amendment of the Constitution of New South Wales, validly enacted in 
the manner prescribed, and was legally binding in New South Wales.
(2) That the legislature of New South Wales was given by Imperial 
statutes plenary power to alter the Constitution, powers and procedure of 
such legislature.
(3) That when once the legislature had altered either the Constitution or 
powers and procedure, then the Constitution and powers and procedure as 
they previously existed ceased to exist, and were replaced by the new 
Constitution and powers.
(4) That the only possible limitations of this plenary power were : (a) it 
must be exercised according to the manner and form prescribed by any 
Imperial or colonial law, and (b) the legislature must continue a 
representative legislature according to the definition of the Colonial Laws 
Validity Act, 1865.
(5) That the addition of Section 7A to the Constitution had the effect of : 
(a) making the legislative body consist thereafter of the King, the 
Legislative Council, the Assembly and the people for the purpose of the 
Constitutional enactments therein described, or (b) imposing a manner and 
form of legislation in reference to these Constitutional enactments which 
thereafter became binding ton the legislature by virtue of the colonial 
Laws Validity Act, 1865, until repealed in the manner and mode 
prescribed.
(6) That the power of altering the Constitution conferred by Section 4 of 
the Constitution Statute, 1855, must be read subject to the Colonial Laws 
Validity Act, 1865, and that in particular the limitation as to manner and 
form prescribed by the 1865 Act must be governed by subsequent 
amendments to the Constitution, whether purporting to be made in the 
earlier Act or not. 
292. The Judicial Committee considered the meaning and effect of Section 5 of the Act of 
1865, read in conjunction with Section 4 of the Constitution Statute. It is necessary to 
bear in mind the relevant part of Section 5 which reads as follows:
Section 5. Every colonial legislature...and every representative legislature 
shall, in respect to the colony under its jurisdiction, have, and be deemed 
at all times to have had, full power to make laws respecting the 
Constitution, powers, and procedure of such legislature; provided that 
such laws shall have been passed in such manner and form as may from 
time to time be required by any Act of Parliament, letters patent, Order in 
Council, or colonial law, for the time being in force in the said colony.
293. The Judicial Committee interpreted Section 5 as follows:
Reading the section as a whole, it gives to the legislatures of New South 
Wales certain powers, subject to this, that in respect of certain laws they 
can only become effectual provided they have been passed in such manner 
and form as may from time to time be required by any Act still on the 
statute book. Beyond that, the words "manner and form" are amply wide 
enough to cover an enactment providing that a Bill is to be submitted to 
the electors and that unless and until a majority of the electors voting 
approve the Bill it shall not be presented to the Governor for His Majesty's 
assent.
294. The Judicial Committee first raised the question : "could that Bill, a repealing Bill, 
after its passage through both chambers, be lawfully presented for the Royal assent 
without having first received the approval of the electors in the prescribed manner ?", and 
answered it thus:
In their Lordships' opinion, the Bill could not lawfully be so presented. 
The proviso in the second sentence of Section 5 of the Act of 1865 states a 
condition which must be fulfilled before the legislature can validly 
exercise its power to make the kind of laws which are referred to in that 
sentence. In order that Section 7A may be repealed (in other words, in 
order that that particular law "respecting the Constitution, powers and 
procedure" of the legislature may be validly made) the law for that 
purpose must have been passed in the manner required by Section 7A, a 
colonial law for the time being in force in New South Wales.
295. This case has no direct relevance to any of the points raised before us. There is no 
doubt that in the case before us, the impugned Constitutional amendments have been 
passed according to the form and manner prescribed by Article 368 of our Constitution. It 
is, however, noteworthy that in contention No. (4), mentioned above, it was urged that 
notwithstanding the plenary powers conferred on the Legislature a possible limitation 
was that the legislature must continue a representative legislature according to the 
definition of the Colonial Laws Validity Act 1865. This is another illustration of a 
limitation implied on amending power.
296. I may also refer to some of the instances of implied limitations which have been 
judicially accepted in the United States. It would suffice if I refer to Cooley on 
Constitutional Limitations and Constitution of the United States of America edited by 
Corwin (1952).
297. After mentioning express limitations, imposed by the Constitution upon the Federal 
power to tax, Cooley on 'Constitutional Limitations' (page 989) states:
...but there are some others which are implied, and which under the 
complex system of American government have the effect to exempt some 
subjects otherwise taxable from the scope and reach, according to 
circumstances, of either the Federal power to tax or the power of the 
several States. One of the implied limitations is that which precludes the 
States from taxing the agencies whereby the general government performs 
its functions. The reason is that, if they possessed this authority, it would 
be within their power to impose taxation to an extent that might cripple, if 
not wholly defeat, the operations of the national authority within its proper 
and Constitutional sphere of action.
298. Then he cites the passage from the Chief Justice Marshall in McCullock v. 
Maryland. 4 L. ed. 579; 607.
299. In "Constitution by the United States of America" by Corwin (1952)-page 728-729 it 
is stated:
Five years after the decision in McCullock v. Maryland that a State may 
not tax an instrumentality of the Federal Government, the Court was asked 
to and did re-examine the entire question in Osborn v. Bank of the United 
States. In that case counsel for the State of Ohio, whose attempt to tax the 
Bank was challenged, put forward the arguments of great importance. In 
the first place it was "contended, that, admitting Congress to possess the 
power, this exemption ought to have been expressly assented in the act of 
incorporation; and not being expressed, ought not to be implied by the 
Court." To which Marshall replied that : "It is no unusual thing for an act 
of Congress to imply, without expressing, this very exemption from state 
control, which is said to be so objectionable in this instance. Secondly the 
appellants relied greatly on the distinction between the bank and the public 
institutions, such as the mint or the post-office. The agents in those offices 
are, it is said, officers of Government, * * * Not so the directors of the 
bank. The connection of the government with the bank, is likened to that 
with contractOrs." Marshall accepted this analogy, but not to the 
advantage of the appellants. He simply indicated that all contractors who 
dealt with the Government were entitled to immunity from taxation upon 
such transactions. Thus not only was the decision of McCullock v. 
Maryland reaffirmed but the foundation was laid for the vast expansion of 
the principle of immunity that was to follow in the succeeding decades.
300. We need not examine the exact extent of the doctrine at the present day in the 
United States because the only purpose in citing these instances is to refute the argument 
of the respondents that there cannot be anything like implied limitations.
301. The position is given at p. 731, as it existed in 1952, when the book was written. 
Corwin sums up the position broadly at p. 736:
Broadly speaking, the immunity which remains is limited to activities of 
the Government itself, and to that which is explicitly created by statute, 
e.g. that granted to federal securities and to fiscal institutions chartered by 
Congress. But the term, activities, will be broadly construed.
302. Regarding the taxation of States, Cooley says at pp. 995-997:
If the States cannot tax the means by which the national government 
performs its functions, neither, on the other hand and for the same reasons, 
can the latter tax the agencies of the State governments. "The same 
supreme power which established the departments of the general 
government determined that the local governments should also exist for 
their own purposes, and made it impossible to protect the people in their 
common interest without them. Each of these several agencies is confined 
to its own sphere, and all are strictly subordinate to the Constitution which 
limits them, and independent of other agencies, except as thereby made 
dependent There is nothing in the Constitution of the United States which 
can be made to admit of any interference by Congress with the secure 
existence of any State authority within its lawful bounds. And any such 
interference by the indirect means of taxation is quite as much beyond the 
power of the national legislature as if the interference were direct and 
extreme. It has, therefore, been held that the law of Congress requiring 
judicial process to be stamped could not Constitutionally be applied to the 
process of the State courts; since otherwise Congress might impose such 
restrictions upon the State courts as would put and end to their effective 
action, and be equivalent practically to abolishing them altogether. And a 
similar ruling has been made in other analogous cases. But "the exemption 
of State agencies and instrumentalities from national taxation is limited to 
those which are of a strictly governmental character, and does not extend 
to those which are used by the State in the carrying on of an ordinary 
private business.
303. I may mention that what has been implied in the United States is the subject-matter 
of express provisions under our Constitution (see Articles 285, 287, 288 and 289).
304. It was urged before us that none of these cases dealt with implied limitations on the 
amending power. It seems to me that four cases are directly in point. I have referred 
already to:
1. The Bribery Commissioner v. Pedrick Ranasinghe [1965] A.C. 172. 
2. Mongol Singh v. Union of India [1967] 3 S.C.R. 109-112.
3. Taylor v. The Attorney-General of Queensland 23 C.L.R. 457 and I will 
be discussing shortly In re The Initiative and Referendum Act [1919] A.C. 
935.
305. What is the necessary implication from all the provisions of the Constitution ?
306. It seems to me that reading the Preamble, the fundamental importance of the 
freedom of the individual, indeed its inalienability, and the importance of the economic, 
social and political justice mentioned in the Preamble, the importance of directive 
principles, the non-inclusion in Article 368 of provisions like Articles 52, 53 and various 
other provisions to which reference has already been made an irresistible conclusion 
emerges that it was not the intention to use the word "amendment" in the widest sense.
307. It was the common understanding that fundamental rights would remain in 
substance as they are and they would not be amended out of existence. It seems also to 
have been a common understanding that the fundamental features of the Constitution, 
namely, secularism, democracy and the freedom of the individual would always subsist in 
the welfare state.
308. In view of the above reasons, a necessary implication arises that there are implied 
limitations on the power of Parliament that the expression "amendment of this 
Constitution" has consequently a limited meaning in our Constitution and not the 
meaning suggested by the respondents.
309. This conclusion is reinforced if I consider the consequences of the contentions of 
both sides. The respondents, who appeal fervently to democratic principles, urge that 
there is ho limit to the powers of Parliament to amend the Constitution. Article 368 can 
itself be amended to make the Constitution completely flexible or extremely rigid and 
unamendable. If this is so, a political party with a two-third majority in Parliament for a 
few years could so amend the Constitution as to debar any other party from functioning, 
establish totalitarianism, enslave the people, and after having effected these purposes 
make the Constitution unamcndable or extremely rigid. This would no doubt invite extra-
Constitutional revolution. Therefore, the appeal by the respondents to democratic 
principles and the necessity of having absolute amending power to prevent a revolution to 
buttress their contention is rather fruitless, because if their contention is accepted the very 
democratic principles, which they appeal to, would disappear and a revolution would also 
become a possibility.
310. However, if the meaning I have suggested is accepted a social and economic 
revolution can gradually take place while preserving the freedom and dignity of every 
citizen.
311. For the aforesaid reasons, I am driven to the conclusion that the expression 
"amendment of this Constitution" in Article 368 means any addition or change in any of 
the provisions of the Constitution within the broad contours of the Preamble and the 
Constitution to carry out the objectives in the Preamble and the Directive Principles. 
Applied to fundamental rights, it would mean that, while fundamental rights cannot be 
abrogated reasonable abridgements of fundamental rights can be effected in the public 
interest.
312. It is of course for Parliament to decide whether an amendment is necessary. The 
Courts will not be concerned with wisdom of the amendment.
313. If this meaning is given it would enable Parliament to adjust fundamental rights in 
order to secure what the Directive Principles direct to be accomplished, while 
maintaining the freedom and dignity of every citizen.
314. It is urged by Mr. Seervai that we would be laying down a very unsatisfactory test 
which it would be difficult for the Parliament to comprehend and follow. He said that the 
Constitution-makers had discarded the concept of "due process" in order to have 
something certain, and they substituted the words "by authority of law" in Article 21. I 
am unable to see what bearing the dropping of the words "due process" has on this 
question. The Constitution itself has used words like "reasonable restrictions" in Article 
19 which do not bear an exact meaning, and which cannot be defined with precision to fit 
in all cases that may come before the courts; it would depend upon the facts of each case 
whether the restrictions imposed by the Legislature are reasonable or not. Further, as 
Lord Reid observed in Ridge v. Baldwin [1964] A.C. 40; 64-65:
In modern times opinions have sometimes been expressed to the effect 
that natural justice is so vague as to be practically meaningless. But I 
would regard these as tainted by the perennial fallacy that because 
something cannot be cut and dried or nicely weighed or measured 
therefore it does not exist. The idea of negligence is equally insusceptible 
of exact definition, but what a reasonable man would regard as fair 
procedure in particular circumstances and what he would regard as 
negligence in particular circumstances are equally capable of serving as 
tests in law, and natural justice as it has been interpreted in the courts is 
much more definite than that.
(emphasis supplied)
315. It seems to me that the concept of amendment within the contours of the Preamble 
and the Constitution cannot be said to be a vague and unsatisfactory idea which 
Parliamentarians and the public would not be able to understand.
316. The learned Attorney-General said that every provision of the Constitution is 
essential; otherwise it would not have been put in the Constitution. This is true. But this 
does not place every provision of the Constitution in the same position. The true position 
is that every provision of the Constitution can be amended provided in the result the basic 
foundation and structure of the Constitution remains the same. The basic structure may be 
said to consist of the following features:
(1) Supremacy of the Constitution; 
(2) Republican and Democratic form of Government.
(3) Secular character of the Constitution; 
(4) Separation of powers between the Legislature, the executive and the 
judiciary; 
(5) Federal character of the Constitution.
317. The above structure is built on the basic foundation, i.e., the dignity and freedom of 
the individual. This is of supreme importance. This cannot by any form of amendment be 
destroyed.
318. The above foundation and the above basic features are easily discernible not only 
from the preamble but the whole scheme of the Constitution, which I have already 
discussed.
319. In connection with the question of abrogation of fundamental rights, Mr. Seervai 
boldly asserted that there was no such thing as natural or inalienable rights because the 
scheme of Part III itself shows that non-citizens have not been given all the fundamental 
freedoms; for example, Article 19 speaks of only citizens. He says that if there were 
natural rights, why is it that they were not conferred on non-citizens. The answer seems 
to be that they are natural rights but our country does not think it expedient to confer 
these fundamental rights, mentioned in Article 19, on non-citizens. Other rights have 
been conferred on non-citizens because the Constitution-makers thought that it would not 
be detrimental to the interests of the country to do so.
320. He then said that even as far as citizens are concerned, there is power to modify 
those rights under Article 33 of the Constitution, which enables Parliament to modify 
rights in their application to the Armed Forces. This power has been reserved in order to 
maintain discipline among the armed forces, which is essential for the security of the 
country. But it does not mean that the rights cease to be natural or human rights. He then 
said that similarly Article 34 restricts fundamental rights while martial law is in force in 
any area. This again is a case where the security of the country is the main consideration. 
Citizens have to undergo many restrictions in the interest of the country.
321. He then pointed out Articles 358 and 359 where certain rights are suspended during 
Emergency. These provisions are again based on the security of the country.
322. He also relied on the words "rights conferred" in Article 13(2) and "enforcement of 
any rights conferred by this Part" to show that they were not natural or inalienable and 
could not have been claimed by them. There is no question of the sovereign people 
claiming them from an outside agency. The people acting through the Constituent 
Assembly desired that the rights mentioned in Part III shall be guaranteed and, therefore, 
Part III was enacted. In the context 'conferred' does not mean that some superior power 
had granted these rights. It is very much like a King bestowing the title of 'His Imperial 
Majesty on himself.
323. I am unable to hold that these provisions show that some rights are not natural or 
inalienable rights. As a matter of fact, India was a party to the Universal Declaration of 
Rights which I have already referred to and that Declaration describes some fundamenal 
rights as inalienable.
324. Various decisions of this Court describe fundamental rights as 'natural rights' or 
'human rights'. Some of these decisions are extracted bellow.
There can be no doubt that the people of India have in exercise of their 
sovereign will as expressed in the Preamble, adopted the democratic ideal, 
which assures to the citizen the dignity of the individual and other 
cherished human values as a means to the full evolution and expression of 
his personality, and in delegating to the legislature, the executive and the 
judiciary their respective powers in the Constitution, reserved to 
themselves certain fundamental rights so-called, I apprehend, because 
they have been retained by the people and made paramount to the 
delegated powers, as in the American Model." (Per Patanjali Sastri, J., in 
Gopalan v. State of Madras [1950] S.C.R. 88; 198 199).
(emphasis supplied)
(ii) "That article (Article 19) enumerates certain freedoms under the 
caption "right to freedom" and deals with those great and basic rights 
which are recognised and guaranteed as the natural rights inherent in the 
status of a citizen of a free country." (Per Patanjali Sastri, C.J., in State of 
West Bengal v. Subodh Gopal Bose [1954] S.C.R. 587; 596).
(emphasis supplied)
I have no doubt that the framers of our Constitution drew the same 
distinction and classed the natural rights or capacity of a citizen 'to 
acquire, hold and dispose of property' with other natural rights and 
freedoms inherent in the status of a free citizen and embodied them in 
Article 19(1)....
(emphasis supplied)
For all these reasons, I am of opinion that under the scheme of the 
Constitution, all those broad and basic freedoms inherent in the status of a 
citizen as a free man are embodied and protected from invasion by the 
State under Clause (1) of Article 19....
(emphasis supplied)
(iii) "The people, however, regard certain rights as paramount, because 
they embrace liberty of action to the individual in matters of private life, 
social intercourse and share in the Government of the country and other 
spheres. The people who vested the three limbs of Government with their 
power and authority, at the same time kept back these rights of citizens 
and also sometimes of noncitizens, and made them inviolable except under 
certain conditions. The rights thus kept back are placed in Part III of the 
Constitution, which is headed 'Fundamental Rights', and the conditions 
under which these rights can be abridged are also indicated in that Part." 
(Per Hidayatullah J., in Ujjambai v. State of U.P. [1963] 1 S.C.R. 778; 
926-7)).
(emphasis supplied)
The High Court of Allahabad has described them as follows:
(iv) "...man has certain natural or inalienable rights and that it is the 
function of the State, in order that human liberty might be preserved and 
human personality developed, to give recognition and free play to those 
rights...
Suffice it to say that they represent a trend in the democratic thought of 
our age." (Motilal v. State of U.P. I.L.R. [1951] 1 All. 269; 387-8.).
(emphasis supplied)
325. Mr. Seervai relied on the observations of S.K. Das, J., in Basheshar Nath v. C.I.T. 
[1959] Supp. (1)

[Excerpt truncated - this is one of the longest judgments in Indian legal history (multiple separate opinions across a 13/5-judge bench); full text available at indiankanoon.org]