Justice K.S.Puttaswamy(Retd) vs Union Of India

Supreme Court of India
 Justice K.S.Puttaswamy(Retd) vs Union Of India on 26 September, 2018

Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 SC (SUPP) 1841, 2019 (1) SCC 1, (2018) 12 SCALE 1, (2018) 4 CURCC 1, (2018) 255 DLT 1, 2018 (4) KCCR SN 331 (SC), AIRONLINE 2018 SC 237

Author: A.K. Sikri

Bench: Chief Justice, A.K. Sikri, A.M. Khanwilkar, D.Y. Chandrachud, Ashok Bhushan

 REPORTABLE

 IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

 CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 494 OF 2012

 JUSTICE K.S. PUTTASWAMY (RETD.)
 AND ANOTHER .....PETITIONER(S)

 VERSUS

 UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS .....RESPONDENT(S)

 WITH

 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 151 OF 2013

 TRANSFERRED CASE (CIVIL) NO. 152 OF 2013

 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 833 OF 2013

 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 829 OF 2013

 TRANSFERRED PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1797 OF 2013

 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 932 OF 2013

 TRANSFERRED PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1796 OF 2013

 CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 144 OF 2014
 IN
 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 494 OF 2012

 TRANSFERRED PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 313 OF 2014

Signature Not Verified TRANSFERRED PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 312 OF 2014
Digitally signed by
CHETAN KUMAR

 SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 2524 OF 2014
Date: 2018.09.26
13:36:51 IST
Reason:

 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 37 OF 2015

 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 1 of 567
 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 220 OF 2015

 CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 674 OF 2015
 IN
 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 829 OF 2013

 TRANSFERRED PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 921 OF 2015

 CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 470 OF 2015
 IN
 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 494 OF 2012

 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 231 OF 2016

 CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 444 OF 2016
 IN
 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 494 OF 2012

 CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 608 OF 2016
 IN
 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 494 OF 2012

 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 797 OF 2016

 CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 844 OF 2017
 IN
 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 494 OF 2012

 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 342 OF 2017

 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 372 OF 2017

 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 841 OF 2017

 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1058 OF 2017

 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 966 OF 2017

 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1014 OF 2017

 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1002 OF 2017

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 2 of 567
 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1056 OF 2017

 AND

 CONTEMPT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 34 OF 2018
 IN
 WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 1014 OF 2017

 JUDGMENT

A.K. SIKRI, J.
(For Chief Justice, himself and A.M. Khanwilkar, J.)

Introduction and Preliminaries:

 It is better to be unique than the best. Because,
 being the best makes you the number one, but
 being unique makes you the only one.

2) ‘Unique makes you the only one’ is the central message of

 Aadhaar, which is on the altar facing constitutional challenge in

 these petitions. ‘Aadhaar’ which means, in English, ‘foundation’

 or ‘base’, has become the most talked about expression in recent

 years, not only in India but in many other countries and

 international bodies. A word from Hindi dictionary has assumed

 secondary significance. Today, mention of the word ‘Aadhaar’

 would not lead a listener to the dictionary meaning of this word.

 Instead, every person on the very mentioning of this word

 ‘Aadhaar’ would associate it with the card that is issued to a

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 3 of 567
 person from where he/she can be identified. It is described as an

 ‘Unique Identity’ and the authority which enrols a person and at

 whose behest the Aadhaar Card is issued is known as Unique

 Identification Authority of India (hereinafter referred to as ‘UIDAI’

 or ‘Authority’). It is described as unique for various reasons.

 UIDAI claims that not only it is a foolproof method of identifying a

 person, it is also an instrument whereby a person can enter into

 any transaction without needing any other document in support.

 It has become a symbol of digital economy and has enabled

 multiple avenues for a common man. Aadhaar scheme, which

 was conceptualised in the year 2006 and launched in the year

 2009 with the creation of UIDAI, has secured the enrolment of

 almost 1.1 billion people in this country. Its use is spreading like

 wildfire, which is the result of robust and aggressive campaigning

 done by the Government, governmental agencies and other such

 bodies. In this way it has virtually become a household symbol.

 The Government boasts of multiple benefits of Aadhaar.

3) At the same time, the very scheme of Aadhaar and the

 architecture built thereupon has received scathing criticism from a

 section of the society. According to them, Aadhaar is a serious

 invasion into the right to privacy of persons and it has the

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 4 of 567
 tendency to lead to a surveillance state where each individual can

 be kept under surveillance by creating his/her life profile and

 movement as well on his/her use of Aadhaar. There has been no

 other subject matter in recent past which has evoked the kind of

 intensive and heated debate wherein both sides, for and against,

 argue so passionately in support of their respective conviction.

 The petitioners in these petitions belong to the latter category

 who apprehend the totalitarian state if Aadhaar project is allowed

 to continue. They are demanding scrapping and demolition of the

 entire Aadhaar structure which, according to them, is anathema

 to the democratic principles and rule of law, which is the bedrock

 of the Indian Constitution. The petitioners have challenged the

 Aadhaar project which took off by way of administrative action in

 the year 2009. Even after Aadhaar got a shield of statutory cover,

 challenge persists as the very enactment known as Aadhaar

 (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and

 Services) Act, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Aadhaar Act’)

 is challenged as constitutionally impermissible. The wide range

 of issues involved in this case is evident from the fact that it took

 almost four months for the parties to finish their arguments in

 these cases, and the Court witnessed highly skilled, suave,

 brilliant and intellectual advocacy, with the traces of passions as

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 5 of 567
 well.

4) The issue has generated heated public debate as well. Even

 outside the Court, there are groups advocating in favour of the

 Aadhaar scheme and those who are stoutly opposing the same.

 Interestingly, it is not only the commoners who belong to either of

 the two groups but intelligentsia is also equally divided. There

 have been number of articles, interviews for discourses in favour

 of or against Aadhaar. Those in favour see Aadhaar project as

 ushering the nation into a regime of good governance, advancing

 socio-economic rights, economic prosperity etc. and in the

 process they claim that it may make the nation a world leader.

 Mr. K.K. Venugopal, learned Attorney General for India, referred

 to the commendations by certain international bodies, including

 the World Bank. We clarify that we have not been influenced by

 such views expressed either in favour or against Aadhaar. Those

 opposing Aadhaar are apprehensive that it may excessively

 intrude into the privacy of citizenry and has the tendency to

 create a totalitarian state, which would impinge upon the

 democratic and constitutional values. Some such opinions of

 various persons/bodies were referred to during the arguments.

 Notwithstanding the passions, emotions, annoyance, despair,

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 6 of 567
 ecstasy, euphoria, coupled with rhetoric, exhibited by both sides

 in equal measure during the arguments, this Court while giving its

 judgment on the issues involved is required to have a posture of

 calmness coupled with objective examination of the issues on the

 touchstone of the constitutional provisions.

5) Initiative in spearheading the attack on the Aadhaar structure was

 taken by the petitioners, namely, Justice K.S. Puttaswamy (Retd.)

 and Mr. Pravesh Khanna, by filing Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of

 2012. At that time, Aadhaar scheme was not under legislative

 umbrella. In the writ petition the scheme has primarily been

 challenged on the ground that it violates fundamental rights of the

 innumerable citizens of India, namely, right to privacy falling

 under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. Few others joined

 the race by filing connected petitions. Series of orders were

 passed in this petition from time to time, some of which would be

 referred to by us at the appropriate stage. In 2016, with the

 passing of the Aadhaar Act, these very petitioners filed another

 writ petition challenging the vires of the Act. Here again, some

 more writ petitions have been filed with the same objective. All

 these writ petitions were clubbed together. There are number of

 interventions as well by various individuals, groups, NGOs, etc.,

 some opposing the petitions and some supporting the Aadhaar
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 7 of 567
 scheme.

6) Before we go into the premise on which the attack is laid on the

 constitutional validity of the Aadhaar project and the Aadhaar Act,

 it would be apposite to take note of the events in chronological

 order that shaped the formulation, take off and implementation of

 the Aadhaar scheme.

7) On March 03, 2006, approval was given by the Department of

 Information Technology, Ministry of Communications and

 Information Technology, Government of India for the project titled

 ‘Unique Identification for BPL Families’ to be implemented by the

 National Informatics Centre (NIC) for over a period of twelve

 months. As a result, a Processes Committee was set up on July

 03, 2006 to suggest the process for updation, modification,

 addition and deletion of data and fields from the core database to

 be created under the Unique Identification for BPL Families

 project. This Committee, on November 26, 2006, prepared a

 paper known as ‘Strategic Vision Unique Identification of

 Residents’. Based thereupon, the Empowered Group of

 Ministers (EGoM) was set up on December 04, 2006, to collate

 the National Population Register under the Citizenship Act, 1955

 and the Unique Identification Number project of the Department

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 8 of 567
 of Information Technology. The EGoM was also empowered to

 look into the methodology and specific milestones for early and

 effective completion of projects and to take a final view on these

 projects. The EGoM was composed of the then Ministers of

 External Affairs, Home Affairs, Law, Panchayati Raj and

 Communications and Information Technology and the then

 Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission.

8) Various meetings on the Unique Identification (hereinafter

 referred to as ‘UID’) project were held from time to time. In the

 fourth meeting held on December 22, 2006, various aspects of

 proposed data elements and their formats were discussed.

 Thereafter, in its fifth meeting held on April 27, 2007, it was

 decided that the evolution of UID database would be in three

 stages in principle. The Committee further decided that linkage

 with major partner databases such as Household Survey of RD

 and the individual State Public Distribution System (PDS)

 databases should be taken up in a phased manner. On June 11,

 2007, at the final stage of the project, a presentation on the UID

 project was made to the then Prime Minister by the Cabinet

 Secretary. The sixth meeting of the UID project was held on June

 15, 2007. The Committee, inter alia, took the following decisions:

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 9 of 567
 (i) The numbering format of 11 digits was approved.

 (ii) The need for UID authority to be created by an executive

 order under the aegis of the Planning Commission was

 appreciated in order to ensure pan-departmental and neutral

 identity for the authority.

 (iii) The proposal for creation of Central and State UIDs was

 approved.

 (iv) Department of Information Technology (DIT) was directed

 to work out modalities for linkage with Election Commission and

 initiate discussions with MoRD and PDS for linkage.

 (v) In principle, approval of proposed sequence for phasing

 plan was granted.

9) In the seventh meeting held on August 30, 2007, the proposed

 administrative framework and structure of UID authority and

 manpower requirement, including financial implications, was

 discussed. It was decided that a detailed proposal based on the

 resource model be presented to the Committee for its ‘in

 principle’ approval. At this stage, EGoM convened its first

 meeting on November 27, 2007. At this meeting, a consensus

 emerged on the following points:

 (i) There is a clear need for creating an identity related

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 10 of 567
 resident database, regardless of whether the database is created

 on a de novo collection of data or is based on an already existing

 data (such as the Election Commission’s Voter List).

 (ii) Additionally, there is a critical need to create an institutional

 mechanism that would ‘own’ the database and be responsible for

 its maintenance and updating.

 (iii) The next meeting is to consider topics relating to collating

 the National Population Register (NPR) and UID schemes,

 including methodology, effective implementation techniques,

 identification of the institutional mechanism stated above, and the

 time schedule for putting the scheme into operation.

 A series of meetings took place thereafter to work out the

 modalities of the programme. Certain issues were raised therein

 and to address those issues, a Committee of Secretaries was

 formed. The said Committee gave its recommendations which

 were discussed by EGoM. After approving the Aadhaar Scheme

 in principle, it instructed the Cabinet Secretary to convene a

 meeting to finalise the detailed organisational structure of the

 UID.

10) After considering the recommendation of the Cabinet Secretary,

 Notification No. A-43011/02/2009-Admn.I was issued on January

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 11 of 567
 28, 2009 by the Government of India which constituted and

 notified the UIDAI as an attached office under the aegis of the

 Planning Commission. Consequent to the constitution of UIDAI,

 allocation of Rs.147.31 crores for Phase I of Aadhaar enrolments

 was approved by the Finance Minister on the recommendation of

 the Standing Committee on Finance. Demo-Official letter dated

 February 25, 2009, was sent by the Secretary, Planning

 Commission to all Chief Secretaries of 35 States/Union Territories

 apprising them of their roles and responsibilities of the

 States/Union Territories in implementation of UIDAI, such as

 appointment of the State/UT UID Commissioners, logistics

 support and coordination with various departments and State

 units.

 As they say, rest is history, which we recapitulate in brief

 hereinafter.

11) A core group was set up to advice and further the work related to

 UIDAI. Budgets were allocated to UIDAI to enable it to undertake

 its task. Staff was also allocated to it. Meetings of the core group

 took place from time to time. The core group, inter alia, decided

 that it was better to start with the electoral roll database of 2009

 for undertaking the UIDAI project. The status of digitisation of

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 12 of 567
 PDS records, state-wise, was sought to be sent from the

 Department of Food and Public Distribution to the Standing

 Commission/UID. This and other steps taken in this direction

 culminated in issuance of Notification dated July 02, 2009

 whereby Mr. Nandan Nilekani was appointed as the Chairman of

 UIDAI for an initial tenure of five years in the rank and status of a

 Cabinet Minister. He assumed charge on July 24, 2009.

 Thereafter, the Prime Minister’s Council of UIDAI was constituted

 on July 30, 2009 which held its first meeting on August 12, 2009

 where the Chairman of UIDAI made detailed representation on

 the broad strategy and approach of the proposed UID project.

 One of the proposals was to provide a legislative framework for

 UID at the earliest so that it could have the legal sanction to

 perform its function. Some other Committees like the Biometrics

 Standard Committee, Demographic Data Standards and

 Verification Procedure Committee were set up as a support

 system to the project, which submitted their respective reports in

 December 2009. Even a Cabinet Committee on UID was

 constituted vide orders dated October 22, 2009 which was

 headed by the Prime Minister with the aim to cover all issues

 relating to UIDAI, including its organisation, policies,

 programmes, schemes, funding and methodology to be adopted

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 13 of 567
 for achieving its objectives.

12) The matter was addressed in the Seventeenth Finance

 Commission Report also which was tabled in the Parliament on

 February 25, 2010. In this report, the Finance Commission

 suggested targeting of subsidies through UIDAI. By April 2010,

 UIDAI came out with its Strategy Overview. This Overview

 describes the features, benefits, revenue model and timelines of

 the UIDAI project. Furthermore, it outlined the goal of the UID to

 serve as a universal proof of identity, allowing residents to prove

 their identities anywhere in the country. The project would give

 the Government a clear view of India’s population, enabling it to

 target and deliver services effectively, achieve greater returns on

 social investments and monitor money and resource flows across

 the country. It was felt that crucial to the achievement of this goal

 is the active participation of the central, state and local

 Governments as well as public and private sector entities. Only

 with their support will the project be able to realise a larger vision

 of inclusion and development in India.

13) A Cabinet Note bearing No. 4(4)/57/2010/CC-UIDAI for the

 Cabinet Committee on UIDAI was submitted on May 12, 2010.

 The Note outlined a brief background of UIDAI, proposed an

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 14 of 567
 approach for collection of demographic and biometric attributes of

 residents for the UID project and sought approval of the Cabinet

 Committee for adoption of the aforesaid approach and suggested

 that the same standards and processes be adhered to by the

 Registrar General of India for the NPR exercise and all other

 Registrars in the UID system. Rationale for inclusion of iris

 biometrics was also submitted with the aforesaid Cabinet Note to

 explain the need for capturing iris scans at the time of capturing

 biometric details.

14) By September 2010 enrolment process of Aadhaar began with

 the nationwide launch of the Aadhaar project. In December 2010,

 UIDAI came out with a report on enrolment process known as

 ‘UID Enrolment Proof-of-Concept Report’ studying enrolment

 proof-of-concept in three rural areas of Karnataka, Bihar and

 Andhra Pradesh published by the UIDAI. According to this report,

 ‘the biometric matching analysis of 40,000 people showed that

 the accuracy levels achieved by both iris and ten fingerprints

 were more than an order of magnitude better compared to using

 either of the two individually. The multi-modal enrolment was

 adequate to carry out de-duplication on a much larger scale, with

 reasonable expectations of extending it to all residents of India’.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 15 of 567
15) Going by the recommendation of the Chairman of UIDAI for

 providing legislative framework to UIDAI, a Bill was introduced in

 the Rajya Sabha on December 03, 2010 known as ‘National

 Identification Authority of India Bill, 2010’.

16) Various other steps were taken to smoothen the process of

 enrolment. There were studies from time to time on the

 effectiveness of the enrolment process. Notifications/orders were

 also issued by the Reserve Bank of India stating that an Aadhaar

 letter would be recognised by Banks to open bank accounts for a

 resident. Similar Orders/Notifications were issued by other

 authorities as well. On the first anniversary of Aadhaar launch,

 which fell on September 29, 2011, announcement was made that

 10 crores enrolments and generation of more than 3.75 crores of

 Aadhaar had taken place. Some of the reports submitted in due

 course of time, which are relevant for our purposes, are taken

 note of at this stage:

 (i) Report of the Task Force on an Aadhaar-Enabled Unified

 Payment Infrastructure for the direct transfer of subsidies on

 Kerosene, LPG and Fertilizer.

 (ii) In March 2012, Fingerprint Authentication Report was

 submitted to UIDAI. This Report showcased the high accuracy

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 16 of 567
 rates of using fingerprints to authenticate identities. The study

 conducted in the rural setting representing typical demography of

 the population established that it is technically possible to use

 fingerprint to authenticate a resident in 98.13% of the population.

 The accuracy of 96.5% can be achieved using one best finger

 and 99.3% can be achieved using two fingers. Further

 improvement is possible if the device specifications are tightened

 to include only the best devices and certain mechanical guide is

 used to aid proper placement of the finger. It was also

 demonstrated through benchmarking that the authentication

 infrastructure is able to sustain one million authentications per

 hour.

 (iii) Fifty Third Report of the Standing Committee on Finance on

 the ‘Demands for Grants (2012-13)’ of the Ministry of Planning

 was presented to the Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha on April 24,

 2012. This Report summarises the objectives and financial

 implications of the UID scheme being implemented under the

 aegis of the Planning Commission.

 (iv) Iris Authentication Accuracy Report was submitted to UIDAI

 on September 12, 2012. This Report based on an empirical

 study of 5833 residents demonstrated iris authentication to be

 viable in Indian context. With current level of device readiness for

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 17 of 567
 iris capture, it is capable of providing coverage for 99.67% of

 population with authentication accuracy of above 99.5%.

 Suggestions made in this document for the vendors, once

 implemented, will improve the rates further. The overall systems

 – network and software – have shown to meet desired

 requirements in real life condition. Finally, six different devices

 with variety of form and function are available to provide

 competitive vendor eco-system.

 (v) Background Note on Introduction to Cash Transfers was

 prepared by the National Committee on Direct Cash Transfers in

 its first meeting on November 26, 2012. This Report outlines the

 advantages of cash transfers in the Indian context stating that a

 unique ID for all is a prerequisite for this purpose.

17) At this juncture, Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 was filed in

 which show-cause notice dated November 30, 2012 was issued

 by this Court. As pointed out above, this writ petition assailed

 Aadhaar scheme primarily on the ground that it violates right to

 privacy which is a facet of fundamental rights enshrined in Article

 21 of the Constitution.

18) Counter affidavit thereto was filed by the Union of India as well as

 UIDAI. The stand taken by the respondents, inter alia, was that

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 18 of 567
 right to privacy is not a fundamental right, which was so held by

 the eight Judge Bench judgment in M.P. Sharma and 4 Others v.

 Satish Chandra Distt. Magistrate, Delhi and 4 Others 1. This is

 notwithstanding the fact that thereafter in many judgments

 rendered by this Court, right to privacy was accepted as a facet of

 Article 21. Contention of the respondents, however, was that

 those judgments were contrary to the dicta laid down in M.P.

 Sharma and were, therefore, per in curium. The matter on this

 aspect was heard by a three Judge Bench and after hearing the

 parties, the Bench deemed it appropriate to make the reference

 to the Constitution Bench. A five Judge Bench was constituted,

 which after considering the matter, referred the same to a nine

 Judge Bench to resolve the controversy in an authoritative

 manner. The nine Judge Bench judgment has given an

 unanimous answer to the Reference with conclusive,

 unambiguous and emphatic determination that right to privacy is

 a part of fundamental rights which can be traced to Articles 14, 19

 and 21 of the Constitution of India.

19) We may also record at this stage that in this petition certain

 interim orders were passed from time to time. We may give the

 gist of some of the relevant orders:

1 1954 SCR 1077
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 19 of 567
 (a) Order dated September 23, 2013 (two Judge Bench)

 “All the matters require to be heard finally. List all matters
 for final hearing after the Constitution Bench is over.

 In the meanwhile, no person should suffer for not getting
 the Aadhaar card in spite of the fact that some authority
 had issued a circular making it mandatory and when any
 person applies to get the Aadhaar card voluntarily, it may
 be checked whether that person is entitled for it under the
 law and it should not be given to any illegal immigrant.”

 (b) Order dated November 26, 2013 (two Judge Bench)

 “After hearing the matter at length, we are of the view that
 all the States and Union Territories have to be impleaded
 as respondents to give effective directions. In view thereof,
 notice be issued to all the States and Union Territories
 through standing counsel.

 xx xx xx

 Interim order to continue, in the meantime.”

 (c) Order dated March 16, 2015 (three Judge Bench)

 “In the meanwhile, it is brought to our notice that in certain
 quarters, Aadhaar identification is being insisted upon by
 the various authorities, we do not propose to go into the
 specific instances.

 Since Union of India is represented by learned Solicitor
 General and all the States are represented through their
 respective counsel, we expect that both the Union of India
 and States and all their functionaries should adhere to the
 order passed by this Court on 23rd September, 2013.”

 (d) Order dated August 11, 2015 (three Judge Bench)

 “Having considered the matter, we are of the view that the
 balance of interest would be best served, till the matter is
 finally decided by a larger Bench, if the Union of India or
 the UIDAI proceed in the following manner:

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 20 of 567
 1. The Union of India shall give wide publicity in the
 electronic and print media including radio and television
 networks that it is not mandatory for a citizen to obtain an
 Aadhaar card.

 2. The production of an Aadhaar card will not be condition
 for obtaining any benefits otherwise due to a citizen.

 3. The Unique Identification Number or the Aadhaar card
 will not be used by the respondents for any purpose other
 than the PDS Scheme and in particular for the purpose of
 distribution of food grains, etc. and cooking fuel, such as
 kerosene. The Aadhaar card may also be used for the
 purpose of LPG Distribution Scheme.

 4. The information about an individual obtained by the
 Unique Identification Authority of India while issuing an
 Aadhaar card shall not be used for any other purpose,
 save as above, except as may be directed by a Court for
 the purpose of criminal investigation.”

 (d) Order dated October 15, 2015 (Constitution Bench)

 “3. After hearing the learned Attorney General for India and
 other learned senior counsels, we are of the view that in
 paragraph 3 of the order dated 11.08.2015, if we add, apart
 from the other two Schemes, namely, P.D.S. Scheme and
 L.P.G. Distribution Scheme, the Schemes like The
 Mahatma Gandhi National Social Assistance Programme
 (Old Age Pensions, Widow Pensions, Disability Pensions),
 Prime Minister’s Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) and
 Employees’ Provident Fund Organisation (EPFO) for the
 present, it would not dilute earlier order passed by this
 Court. Therefore, we now include the aforesaid Schemes
 apart from the other two Schemes that this Court has
 permitted in its earlier order dated 11.08.2015.

 4. We impress upon the Union of India that it shall strictly
 follow all the earlier orders passed by this Court
 commencing from 23.09.2013.

 5. We will also make it clear that the Aadhaar card scheme
 is purely voluntary and it cannot be made mandatory till the
 matter is finally decided by this Court one way or the other.”

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 21 of 567
 (e) Order dated September 14, 2016 in WP (C) No. 686/2016

 “Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case,
 the material evidence available on record and the
 submissions made by learned senior counsel, we stay the
 operation and implementation of letters dated 14.07.2006
 (i.e. Annexure P-5, P-6, P-7) for Pre-Matric Scholarship
 Scheme, Post-Matric Scholarship Scheme and Merit-cum-
 Means Scholarship Scheme to the extent they have made
 submission of Aadhaar mandatory and direct the Ministry of
 Electronics and Information Technology, Government of
 India, i.e. respondent No.2, to remove Aadhaar number as
 a mandatory condition for student registration form at the
 National Scholarship Portal of Ministry of Electronics and
 Information Technology, Government of India at the
 website...”

20) It is also relevant to point out that against an order passed by the

 High Court of Bombay at Panaji, in some criminal proceedings,

 wherein the Authority was directed to pass on biometric

 information on a person, UIDAI had filed Special Leave Petition

 (Criminal) No. 2524 of 2014 challenging the said order with the

 submission that such a direction for giving biometric information

 was contrary to the provisions of the Aadhaar Act and the

 Authority was not supposed to give such an information, which

 was confidential. In the said special leave petition, order dated

 March 24, 2014 was passed staying the operation of the orders of

 the Bombay High Court. This order reads as under:

 “Issue notice.

 In addition to normal mode of service, dasti service, is
 permitted.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 22 of 567
 Operation of the impugned order shall remain stayed.

 In the meanwhile, the present petitioner is restrained from
 transferring any biometric information of any person who
 has been allotted the Aadhaar number to any other agency
 without his consent in writing.

 More so, no person shall be deprived of any service for
 want of Aadhaar number in case he/she is otherwise
 eligible/entitled. All the authorities are directed to modify
 their forms/circulars/likes so as to not compulsorily require
 the Aadhaar number in order to meet the requirement of
 the interim order passed by this Court forthwith.

 Tag and list the matter with main matter i.e. WP (C) No.
 494 of 2012.”

21) Likewise, in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1002 of 2017 titled Dr. Kalyan

 Menon Sen v. Union of India and Others, where constitutional

 validity of linking bank accounts and mobile phones with Aadhaar

 linkage was challenged, interim order was passed on November

 03, 2017 extending the last date of linking to December 31, 2017

 and February 06, 2018 respectively. This order was extended

 thereafter and continues to operate.

22) We would also like to refer to the order dated September 14,

 2011 passed in People’s Union for Civil Liberties (PDS Matter) v.

 Union of India & Ors.2, wherein various directions were given to

 ensure effective implementation of the PDS Scheme and in the

 process to also undertake the exercise of eliminating the task and

2 (2011) 14 SCC 331
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 23 of 567
 ghost ration cards. In the same manner, vide order dated March

 16, 2012 it was noted that the Government had set up a task

 force under the Chairmanship of Mr. Nandan Nilekani to

 recommend, amongst others, an IT strategy for the PDS. Mr.

 Nilekani was requested to suggest ways and means by which

 computerization process of the PDS can be expedited.

 Computerisation of PDS system was directed to be prepared and

 in this hue the process of computerisation with Aadhaar

 registration was also suggested.

 In the same very case above, which also pertained to

 providing night shelters to homeless destitute persons, some

 orders were passed on February 10, 2010 3 as well as on

 September 14, 20114.

23) Again, in the case of State of Kerala & Ors. v. President, Parent

 Teachers Association SNVUP School and Ors. 5, where the Court

 was concerned with the problem of fake or bogus admissions, it

 was felt that instead of involving the Police in schools to prevent

 fake admissions, more appropriate method of verification would

 be Unique Identification (UID) card as means of verification.

Architecture of the Aadhaar Project and the Aadhaar Act:
3 (2010) 5 SC 318
4 (2010) 13 SCC 45
5 (2013) 2 SCC 705
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 24 of 567
24) Before adverting to the discussion on various issues that have

 been raised in these petitions, it would be apposite to first

 understand the structure of the Aadhaar Act and how it operates,

 having regard to various provisions contained therein. UIDAI was

 established in the year 2009 by an administrative order i.e. by

 resolution of the Govt. of India, Planning Commission, vide

 notification dated January 28, 2009. The object of the

 establishment of the said Authority was primarily to lay down

 policies to implement the Unique Identification Scheme (for short

 the ‘UIS’) of the Government, by which residents of India were to

 be provided unique identity number. The aim was to serve this as

 proof of identity, which is unique in nature, as each individual will

 have only one identity with no chance of duplication. Another

 objective was that this number could be used for identification of

 beneficiaries for transfer of benefits, subsidies, services and other

 purposes. This was the primary reason, viz. to ensure correct

 identification of targeted beneficiaries for delivery of various

 subsidies, benefits, services, grants, wages and other social

 benefits schemes which are funded from the Consolidated Fund

 of India. It was felt that the identification of real and genuine

 beneficiaries had become a challenge for the Government. In the

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 25 of 567
 absence of a credible system to authenticate identity of

 beneficiaries, it was becoming difficult to ensure that the

 subsidies, benefits and services reach to intended beneficiaries.

 As per the Government, failure to establish identity was proving

 to be major hindrance for the successful implementation of the

 welfare programmes and it was hitting hard the marginalised

 section of the society and, in particular, women, children, senior

 citizens, persons with disabilities, migrant unskilled and organised

 workers, and nomadic tribes. After the establishment of the

 Authority, vide the aforesaid notification, it started enrolling the

 residents of this country under the UIS. These residents also

 started using Aadhaar number allotted to them. It was found that

 over a period of time, the use of Aadhaar number had increased

 manifold. This necessitated ensuring security of the information

 contained in Aadhaar number as well as the information that

 generated as a result of the use of Aadhaar numbers. It was,

 thus, felt desirable to back the system with a Parliamentary

 enactment.

25) With this intention, the Aadhaar Bill was introduced with the

 following Introduction:

 “The Unique Identification Authority of India was
 established by a resolution of the Government of India in
 2009. It was meant primarily to lay down policies and to
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 26 of 567
 implement the Unique Identification Scheme, by which
 residents of India were to be provided unique identity
 number. This number wold serve as proof of identity and
 could be used for identification of beneficiaries for transfer
 of benefits, subsidies, services and other purposes.

 Later on, it was felt that the process of enrollment,
 authentication, security, confidentiality and use of Aadhaar
 related information be made statutory so as to facilitate the
 use of Aadhaar number for delivery of various benefits,
 subsidies and services, the expenditures of which were
 incurred from or receipts therefrom formed part of the
 Consolidated Fund of India.

 The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other
 Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Bill, 2016 inter alia,
 provides for establishment of Unique Identification Authority
 of India, issuance of Aadhaar number to individuals,
 maintenance and updating of information in the Central
 Identities Data Repository, issues pertaining to security,
 privacy and confidentiality of information as well as
 offences and penalties for contravention of relevant
 statutory provisions.”

26) After mentioning the reasons recorded above, Statement of

 Objects and Reasons for introducing the Bill also highlight the

 salient features thereof in the following manner:

 “5. The Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other
 Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Bill, 2016, inter alia,
 seeks to provide for—

 (a) issue of Aadhaar numbers to individuals on providing
 his demographic and biometric information to the Unique
 Identification Authority of India;

 (b) requiring Aadhaar numbers for identifying an individual
 for delivery of benefits, subsidies, and services the
 expenditure is incurred from or the receipt therefrom forms
 part of the Consolidated Fund of India;

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 27 of 567
 (c) authentication of the Aadhaar number of an Aadhaar
 number holder in relation to his demographic and biometric
 information;

 (d) establishment of the Unique Identification Authority of
 India consisting of a Chairperson, two Members and a
 Member-Secretary to perform functions in pursuance of the
 objectives above;

 (e) maintenance and updating the information of
 individuals in the Central Identities Data Repository in such
 manner as may be specified by regulations;

 (f) measures pertaining to security, privacy and
 confidentiality of information in possession or control of the
 Authority including information stored in the Central
 Identities Data Repository; and

 (g) offences and penalties for contravention of relevant
 statutory provisions.”

27) The Bill having been passed by the Legislature, received the

 assent of the President on March 25, 2016 and, thus, became Act

 (18 of 2016). Preamble to this Act again emphasises the aim and

 objective which this Act seeks to achieve. It reads:

 “An Act to provide for, as a good governance, efficient,
 transparent, and targeted delivery of subsidies, benefits
 and services, the expenditure for which is incurred from the
 Consolidated Fund of India, to individuals residing in India
 through assigning of unique identity numbers to such
 individuals and for matters connected therewith or
 incidental thereto”

28) Section 2 of the Act provides certain definitions. Some of the

 definitions can be noted at this stage itself, while other relevant

 definitions would be mentioned at the appropriate stage.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 28 of 567
 “(a) “Aadhaar number” means an identification number
 issued to an individual under sub-section (3) of Section 3;

 (b) “Aadhaar number holder” means an individual who has
 been issued an Aadhaar number under this Act;

 (c) “authentication” means the process by which the
 Aadhaar number along with demographic information or
 biometric information of an individual is submitted to the
 Central Identities Data Repository for its verification and
 such Repository verifies the correctness, or the lack
 thereof, on the basis of information available with it;

 (d) “authentication record” means the record of the time of
 authentication and identity of the requesting entity and the
 response provided by the Authority thereto;

 xx xx xx

 (f) “benefit” means any advantage, gift, reward, relief, or
 payment, in cash or kind, provided to an individual or a
 group of individuals and includes such other benefits as
 may be notified by the Central Government;

 (g) “biometric information” means photograph, finger print,
 Iris scan, or such other biological attributes of an individual
 as may be specified by regulations;

 (h) “Central Identities Data Repository” means a
 centralised database in one or more locations containing
 all Aadhaar numbers issued to Aadhaar number holders
 along with the corresponding demographic information and
 biometric information of such individuals and other
 information related thereto;

 xx xx xx

 (j) “core biometric information” means finger print, Iris
 scan, or such other biological attribute of an individual as
 may be specified by regulations;

 (k) “demographic information” includes information relating
 to the name, date of birth, address and other relevant
 information of an individual, as may be specified by
 regulations for the purpose of issuing an Aadhaar number,
 but shall not include race, religion, caste, tribe, ethnicity,

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 29 of 567
 language, records of entitlement, income or medical
 history;

 (l) “enrolling agency” means an agency appointed by the
 Authority or a Registrar, as the case may be, for collecting
 demographic and biometric information of individuals under
 this Act;

 (m) “enrollment” means the process, as may be specified
 by regulations, to collect demographic and biometric
 information from individuals by the enrolling agencies for
 the purpose of issuing Aadhaar numbers to such
 individuals under this Act;

 (n) “identity information” in respect of an individual,
 includes his Aadhaar number, his biometric information and
 his demographic information;

 xx xx xx

 (r) “records of entitlement” means records of benefits,
 subsidies or services provided to, or availed by, any
 individual under any programme;

 xx xx xx

 (u) “requesting entity” means an agency or person that
 submits the Aadhaar number, and demographic information
 or biometric information, of an individual to the Central
 Identities Data Repository for authentication;

 (v) “resident” means an individual who has resided in India
 for a period or periods amounting in all to one hundred and
 eighty-two days or more in the twelve months immediately
 preceding the date of application for enrolment;

 (w) “service” means any provision, facility, utility or any
 other assistance provided in any form to an individual or a
 group of individuals and includes such other services as
 may be notified by the Central Government;

 (x) “subsidy” means any form of aid, support, grant,
 subvention, or appropriation, in cash or kind, to an
 individual or a group of individuals and includes such other
 subsidies as may be notified by the Central Government.”

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 30 of 567
29) Chapter II of the Act deals with enrolment. Section 3 in this

 Chapter entitles every resident to obtain the Aadhaar number by

 submitting his demographic information and biometric

 information. As noted above, demographic information includes

 information relating to the name, date of birth, address and ‘other

 relevant information of an individual, as may be specified by

 regulations for the purpose of issuing an Aadhaar number’.

 Photograph, fingerprint, iris scan, ‘or such other biological

 attribute of an individual as may be specified by regulations’ are

 treated as biometric information. Sub-section (2) of Section 3

 stipulates that the enrolling agency shall, at the time of enrolment,

 inform the individual undergoing enrolment of the following details

 in such manner as may be specified by regulations, namely:

 (a) the manner in which the information shall be used;

 (b) the nature of recipients with whom the information is

 intended to be shared during authentication; and

 (c) the existence of a right to access information, the procedure

 for making requests for such access, and details of the person or

 department in-charge to whom such requests can be made.

30) Section 4, inter alia, provides that Aadhaar number issued to an

 individual shall not be reassigned to any individual. In this sense,
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 31 of 567
 it makes an Aadhaar number given to a particular individual

 ‘unique’. Section 5 delineates special measures for issuance of

 Aadhaar number to certain categories of persons and reads as

 under:

 “5. Special measures for issuance of Aadhaar number
 to certain category of persons.— The Authority shall take
 special measures to issue Aadhaar number to women,
 children, senior citizens, persons with disability, unskilled
 and unorganised workers, nomadic tribes or to such other
 persons who do not have any permanent dwelling house
 and such other categories of individuals as may be
 specified by regulations.”

31) Section 6 enables the Authority to update demographic and

 biometric information of the Aadhaar number holders from time to

 time.

32) Chapter III deals with ‘authentication’, which has generated the

 maximum debate in these proceedings. Section 7 falling under

 this Chapter mandates that proof of Aadhaar number would be

 necessary for receipt of certain subsidies, benefits and services

 etc. meaning thereby for availing such subsidies, benefits and

 services, it would be necessary for the intended beneficiary to

 possess Aadhaar number. In case of an individual to whom no

 Aadhaar number has been assigned, he/she would be required to

 show that application for enrolment has been given. Where the

 Aadhaar number is not assigned, proviso to Section 7 lays down
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 32 of 567
 that the individual shall be offered alternate and viable means of

 identification for delivery of subsidy, benefit or service. Section 8

 deals with authentication of Aadhaar number and provides that on

 submission of request by any requesting entity, the Authority shall

 perform authentication of Aadhaar number. This authentication is

 in relation to biometric information or demographic information of

 an Aadhaar number holder. Before collecting identity information

 for the purpose of authentication, the requesting entity is to obtain

 consent of an individual and also to ensure that the identity

 information of that individual is only used for submission to the

 Central Identities Data Repository (CIDR) for authentication.

 Sections 7 and 8 read as under:

 “7. Proof of Aadhaar number necessary for receipt of
 certain subsidies, benefits and services, etc.— The
 Central Government or, as the case may be, the State
 Government may, for the purpose of establishing identity of
 an individual as a condition for receipt of a subsidy, benefit
 or service for which the expenditure is incurred from, or the
 receipt therefrom forms part of, the Consolidated Fund of
 India, require that such individual undergo authentication,
 or furnish proof of possession of Aadhaar number or in the
 case of an individual to whom no Aadhaar number has
 been assigned, such individual makes an application for
 enrolment:

 Provided that if an Aadhaar number is not assigned
 to an individual, the individual shall be offered alternate and
 viable means of identification for delivery of the subsidy,
 benefit or service.

 8. Authentication of Aadhaar number.— (1) The
 Authority shall perform authentication of the Aadhaar
 number of an Aadhaar number holder submitted by any
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 33 of 567
 requesting entity, in relation to his biometric information or
 demographic information, subject to such conditions and
 on payment of such fees and in such manner as may be
 specified by regulations.

 (2) A requesting entity shall—

 (a) unless otherwise provided in this Act, obtain the
 consent of an individual before collecting his identity
 information for the purposes of authentication in such
 manner as may be specified by regulations; and

 (b) ensure that the identity information of an individual is
 only used for submission to the Central Identities Data
 Repository for authentication.

 (3) A requesting entity shall inform, in such manner as may
 be specified by regulations, the individual submitting his
 identity information for authentication, the following details
 with respect to authentication, namely—

 (a) the nature of information that may be shared upon
 authentication;

 (b) the uses to which the information received during
 authentication may be put by the requesting entity; and

 (c) alternatives to submission of identity information to the
 requesting entity.

 (4) The Authority shall respond to an authentication query
 with a positive, negative or any other appropriate response
 sharing such identity information excluding any core
 biometric information.”

33) Under Section 10, the Authority is given power to engage one or

 more entities to establish and maintain the CIDR and to perform

 any other functions as may be specified by regulations.

34) Chapter IV deals with the Establishment of the Authority. As per

 Section 11, the Central Government, by notification, shall
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 34 of 567
 establish an Authority to be known as the Unique Identification

 Authority of India. Notification dated July 12, 2016 was issued by

 the Central Government establishing the Authority. Other

 provisions in this Chapter deal with the composition of the

 Authority, qualifications for appointment of the Chairperson and

 Members of Authority; term of their office and their removal; and

 restrictions on their employment after cessation of office. It also

 provides for the functions of Chairperson as well as office of the

 Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and his functions and the

 meetings of the Authority etc. Powers and functions of the

 Authority are stipulated in Section 23.

35) Chapter V talks of grants to the Authority by the Central

 Government as well as accounts and audit and annual report of

 the Authority.

36) Chapter VI deals with the important aspects pertaining to

 ‘protection of information’. Section 28 of the Aadhaar Act puts an

 obligation on the Authority to ensure the security of identity

 information and authentication records of individuals. Likewise,

 Section 29 imposes certain restrictions on sharing information i.e.

 core biometric information collected or created under the Act or

 the identity information. The biometric information collected and

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 35 of 567
 stored in electronic form, in accordance with this Act and

 regulations made thereunder, is treated as ‘electronic record’ and

 ‘sensitive personal data or information’ by virtue of Section 30 of

 the Act. As these are very material and significant provisions of

 the Act, the same are reproduced verbatim in their entirety:

 “28. Security and confidentiality of information.— (1)
 The Authority shall ensure the security of identity
 information and authentication records of individuals.

 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Authority shall
 ensure confidentiality of identity information and
 authentication records of individuals.

 (3) The Authority shall take all necessary measures to
 ensure that the information in the possession or control of
 the Authority, including information stored in the Central
 Identities Data Repository, is secured and protected
 against access, use or disclosure not permitted under this
 Act or regulations made thereunder, and against accidental
 or intentional destruction, loss or damage.

 (4) Without prejudice to sub-sections (1) and (2), the
 Authority shall—

 (a) adopt and implement appropriate technical and
 organisational security measures;

 (b) ensure that the agencies, consultants, advisors or
 other persons appointed or engaged for performing any
 function of the Authority under this Act, have in place
 appropriate technical and organisational security measures
 for the information; and

 (c) ensure that the agreements or arrangements entered
 into with such agencies, consultants, advisors or other
 persons, impose obligations equivalent to those imposed
 on the Authority under this Act, and require such agencies,
 consultants, advisors and other persons to act only on
 instructions from the Authority.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 36 of 567
 29. Restriction on sharing information.— (1) No core
 biometric information, collected or created under this Act,
 shall be—

 (a) shared with anyone for any reason whatsoever; or

 (b) used for any purpose other than generation of Aadhaar
 numbers and authentication under this Act.

 (2) The identity information, other than core biometric
 information, collected or created under this Act may be
 shared only in accordance with the provisions of this Act
 and in such manner as may be specified by regulations.

 (3) No identity information available with a requesting
 entity shall be—

 (a) used for any purpose, other than that specified to the
 individual at the time of submitting any identity information
 for authentication; or

 (b) disclosed further, except with the prior consent of the
 individual to whom such information relates.

 (4) No Aadhaar number or core biometric information
 collected or created under this Act in respect of an Aadhaar
 number holder shall be published, displayed or posted
 publicly, except for the purposes as may be specified by
 regulations.

 30. Biometric information deemed to be sensitive
 personal information.— The biometric information
 collected and stored in electronic form, in accordance with
 this Act and regulations made thereunder, shall be deemed
 to be “electronic record” and “sensitive personal data or
 information”, and the provisions contained in the
 Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000) and the
 rules made thereunder shall apply to such information, in
 addition to, and to the extent not in derogation of the
 provisions of this Act.

 Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the
 expressions—

 (a) “electronic form” shall have the same meaning as
 assigned to it in clause (r) of sub-section (1) of Section 2 of
 the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000);
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 37 of 567
 (b) “electronic record” shall have the same meaning as
 assigned to it in clause (t) of sub-section (1) of Section 2 of
 the Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000);

 (c) “sensitive personal data or information” shall have the
 same meaning as assigned to it in clause (iii) of the
 Explanation to Section 43-A of the Information Technology
 Act, 2000 (21 of 2000).”

37) Section 32 provides that the Authority shall maintain

 authentication records in such manner and for such period as

 may be specified by regulations and enables every Aadhaar

 number holder to obtain his authentication record in such manner

 as may be specified by regulations. This provision also puts an

 embargo upon the Authority to collect, keep or maintain any

 information about ‘purpose of authentication’. Section 33,

 however, creates an exception to the provisions of Section 28(ii)

 and (v) as well as Section 29(ii) by stipulating that the information

 can be disclosed pursuant to an order of a court not inferior to

 that of a District Judge. It also carves out another exception in

 those cases where it becomes necessary to disclose the

 information in the interest of national security in pursuance of a

 direction of an officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the

 Government of India specially authorised in this behalf by an

 order of the Central Government.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 38 of 567
38) Sections 34 to 47 in Chapter VII of the Act enumerate various

 kinds of offences and provide penalties for such offences. For

 our purposes, relevant Section is Section 37 which makes act of

 disclosing identity information as offence which is punishable with

 imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with

 a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees. In the case of a

 company, this fine can extend to one lakh rupees. Likewise,

 Section 38 provides for penalty for unauthorised access to the

 CIDR. Penalties for tampering with data in CIDR (Section 39)

 and unauthorised use by requesting entity (Section 40) are also

 stipulated.

 Cognizance of offences under this Chapter can be taken by

 a court only on a complaint made by the Authority or any officer or

 person authorised by it.

39) Section 50 of the Act empowers the Central Government to issue

 directions to the Authority in writing from time to time and the

 Authority shall be bound to carry out such directions on questions

 of policy. Section 53 empowers the Central Government to make

 rules to carry out the provisions of the Act generally as well as the

 specific matters enumerated in sub-section (2) thereof. Section

 54 empowers the Authority to make regulations consistent with

 the Act and Rules made thereunder, for carrying out the
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 39 of 567
 provisions of the Act and, in particular, the matters mentioned in

 sub-section (2). Such Rules and Regulations are to be laid

 before the Parliament, as provided in Section 55.

40) Section 57 provides that the Aadhaar Act would not prevent the

 use of Aadhaar number for establishing the identity of an

 individual for any purpose and reads as under:

 “57. Act not to prevent use of Aadhaar number for
 other purposes under law.— Nothing contained in this
 Act shall prevent the use of Aadhaar number for
 establishing the identity of an individual for any purpose,
 whether by the State or any body corporate or person,
 pursuant to any law, for the time being in force, or any
 contract to this effect:

 Provided that the use of Aadhaar number under this
 section shall be subject to the procedure and obligations
 under Section 8 and Chapter VI.”

41) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the Act,

 the Central Government is empowered to make provisions to

 remove those difficulties, provided that such provisions are not

 inconsistent with the provisions of the Act. Section 59, which is

 the last provision in the Act, is an attempt to save all the acts and

 actions of the Central Government under Notification dated

 January 28, 2009 vide which the Authority was established or the

 Department of Electronics and Information Technology under the

 Cabinet Secretariat Notification dated September 12, 2015. This

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 40 of 567
 provision is couched in the following language:

 “59. Savings.— Anything done or any action taken by the
 Central Government under the Resolution of the
 Government of India, Planning Commission bearing
 Notification Number A-43011/02/2009-Admin. I, dated the
 28th January, 2009, or by the Department of Electronics
 and Information Technology under the Cabinet Secretariat
 Notification bearing Notification Number S.O. 2492(E),
 dated the 12th September, 2015, as the case may be, shall
 be deemed to have been validly done or taken under this
 Act.”

42) Regulations have been framed under the Act, namely, (1) The

 Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations, 2016; (2) The

 Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations, 2016; (3) The Aadhaar

 (Data Security) Regulations, 2016; and (4) The Aadhaar (Sharing

 of Information) Regulations, 2016. The relevant provisions in

 these Regulations are reproduced below:

 “The Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations, 2016

 4. Demographic information required for enrolment. —
 (1) The following demographic information shall be
 collected from all individuals undergoing enrolment (other
 than children below five years of age):
 (i) Name;
 (ii) Date of Birth;
 (iii) Gender;
 (iv) Residential Address.

 (2) The following demographic information may also
 additionally be collected during enrolment, at the option of
 the individual undergoing enrolment:
 (i) Mobile number
 (ii) Email address

 (3) In case of Introducer-based enrolment, the following
 additional information shall be collected:
 (i) Introducer name;
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 41 of 567
 (ii)Introducer’s Aadhaar number.

 (4) In case of Head of Family based enrolment, the
 following additional information shall be collected:
 (i) Name of Head of Family;
 (ii) Relationship;
 (iii) Head of Family’s Aadhaar number;
 (iv) One modality of biometric information of the Head of
 Family.

 (5) The standards of the above demographic information
 shall be as may be specified by the Authority for this
 purpose.

 (6) The demographic information shall not include race,
 religion, caste, tribe, ethnicity, language, record of
 entitlement, income or medical history of the resident.

 The Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations, 2016

 3. Types of Authentication.— There shall be two types of
 authentication facilities provided by the Authority, namely—

 (i) Yes/No authentication facility, which may be carried out
 using any of the modes specified in regulation 4(2); and

 (ii) e-KYC authentication facility, which may be carried out
 only using OTP and/ or biometric authentication modes as
 specified in regulation 4(2).

 4. Modes of Authentication. — (1) An authentication
 request shall be entertained by the Authority only upon a
 request sent by a requesting entity electronically in
 accordance with these regulations and conforming to the
 specifications laid down by the Authority.

 (2) Authentication may be carried out through the following
 modes:

 (a) Demographic authentication: The Aadhaar number and
 demographic information of the Aadhaar number holder
 obtained from the Aadhaar number holder is matched with
 the demographic information of the Aadhaar number holder
 in the CIDR.

 (b) One-time pin based authentication: A One Time Pin
 (OTP), with limited time validity, is sent to the mobile
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 42 of 567
 number and/ or e-mail address of the Aadhaar number
 holder registered with the Authority, or generated by other
 appropriate means. The Aadhaar number holder shall
 provide this OTP along with his Aadhaar number during
 authentication and the same shall be matched with the
 OTP generated by the Authority.

 (c) Biometric-based authentication: The Aadhaar number
 and biometric information submitted by an Aadhaar number
 holder are matched with the biometric information of the
 said Aadhaar number holder stored in the CIDR. This may
 be fingerprints-based or iris-based authentication or other
 biometric modalities based on biometric information stored
 in the CIDR.

 (d) Multi-factor authentication: A combination of two or
 more of the above modes may be used for authentication.

 (3) A requesting entity may choose suitable mode(s) of
 authentication from the modes specified in sub-regulation
 (2) for a particular service or business function as per its
 requirement, including multiple factor authentication for
 enhancing security. For the avoidance of doubt, it is
 clarified that e-KYC authentication shall only be carried out
 using OTP and/ or biometric authentication.

 xx xx xx

 7. Capturing of biometric information by requesting
 entity.— (1) A requesting entity shall capture the biometric
 information of the Aadhaar number holder using certified
 biometric devices as per the processes and specifications
 laid down by the Authority.

 (2) A requesting entity shall necessarily encrypt and secure
 the biometric data at the time of capture as per the
 specifications laid down by the Authority.

 (3) For optimum results in capturing of biometric
 information, a requesting entity shall adopt the processes
 as may be specified by the Authority from time to time for
 this purpose.

 xx xx xx

 9. Process of sending authentication requests.— (1)
 After collecting the Aadhaar number or any other identifier
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 43 of 567
 provided by the requesting entity which is mapped to
 Aadhaar number and necessary demographic and / or
 biometric information and/ or OTP from the Aadhaar
 number holder, the client application shall immediately
 package and encrypt these input parameters into PID block
 before any transmission, as per the specifications laid
 down by the Authority, and shall send it to server of the
 requesting entity using secure protocols as may be laid
 down by the Authority for this purpose.

 (2) After validation, the server of a requesting entity shall
 pass the authentication request to the CIDR, through the
 server of the Authentication Service Agency as per the
 specifications laid down by the Authority. The
 authentication request shall be digitally signed by the
 requesting entity and/or by the Authentication Service
 Agency, as per the mutual agreement between them.

 (3) Based on the mode of authentication request, the CIDR
 shall validate the input parameters against the data stored
 therein and return a digitally signed Yes or No
 authentication response, or a digitally signed e-KYC
 authentication response with encrypted e-KYC data, as the
 case may be, along with other technical details related to
 the authentication transaction.

 (4) In all modes of authentication, the Aadhaar number is
 mandatory and is submitted along with the input
 parameters specified in sub-regulation (1) above such that
 authentication is always reduced to a 1:1 match.

 (5) A requesting entity shall ensure that encryption of PID
 Block takes place at the time of capture on the
 authentication device as per the processes and
 specifications laid down by the Authority.

 xx xx xx

 18. Maintenance of logs by requesting entity. — (1) A
 requesting entity shall maintain logs of the authentication
 transactions processed by it, containing the following
 transaction details, namely:—
 (a) the Aadhaar number against which authentication is
 sought;
 (b) specified parameters of authentication request
 submitted;

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 44 of 567
 (c) specified parameters received as authentication
 response;
 (d) the record of disclosure of information to the Aadhaar
 number holder at the time of authentication; and
 (e) record of consent of the Aadhaar number holder for
 authentication, but shall not, in any event, retain the PID
 information.

 (2) The logs of authentication transactions shall be
 maintained by the requesting entity for a period of 2 (two)
 years, during which period an Aadhaar number holder shall
 have the right to access such logs, in accordance with the
 procedure as may be specified.

 (3) Upon expiry of the period specified in sub-regulation
 (2), the logs shall be archived for a period of five years or
 the number of years as required by the laws or regulations
 governing the entity, whichever is later, and upon expiry of
 the said period, the logs shall be deleted except those
 records required to be retained by a court or required to be
 retained for any pending disputes.

 (4) The requesting entity shall not share the authentication
 logs with any person other than the concerned Aadhaar
 number holder upon his request or for grievance redressal
 and resolution of disputes or with the Authority for audit
 purposes. The authentication logs shall not be used for any
 purpose other than stated in this sub-regulation.

 (5) The requesting entity shall comply with all relevant
 laws, rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, the
 Information Technology Act, 2000 and the Evidence Act,
 1872, for the storage of logs.

 (6) The obligations relating to authentication logs as
 specified in this regulation shall continue to remain in force
 despite termination of appointment in accordance with
 these regulations.

 xx xx xx

 26. Storage and Maintenance of Authentication
 Transaction Data. — (1) The Authority shall store and
 maintain authentication transaction data, which shall
 contain the following information:—
 (a) authentication request data received including PID
 block;
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 45 of 567
 (b) authentication response data sent;
 (c) meta data related to the transaction;
 (d) any authentication server side configurations as
 necessary Provided that the Authority shall not, in any
 case, store the purpose of authentication.

 The Aadhaar (Data Security) Regulations, 2016

 3. Measures for ensuring information security. — (1)
 The Authority may specify an information security policy
 setting out inter alia the technical and organisational
 measures to be adopted by the Authority and its personnel,
 and also security measures to be adopted by agencies,
 advisors, consultants and other service providers engaged
 by the Authority, registrar, enrolling agency, requesting
 entities, and Authentication Service Agencies.

 (2) Such information security policy may provide for:—
 (a) identifying and maintaining an inventory of assets
 associated with the information and information processing
 facilities;
 (b) implementing controls to prevent and detect any loss,
 damage, theft or compromise of the assets;
 (c) allowing only controlled access to confidential
 information;
 (d) implementing controls to detect and protect against
 virus/malwares;
 (e) a change management process to ensure information
 security is maintained during changes;
 (f) a patch management process to protect information
 systems from vulnerabilities and security risks;
 (g) a robust monitoring process to identify unusual events
 and patterns that could impact security and performance of
 information systems and a proper reporting and mitigation
 process;
 (h) encryption of data packets containing biometrics, and
 enabling decryption only in secured locations;
 (i) partitioning of CIDR network into zones based on risk
 and trust;
 (j) deploying necessary technical controls for protecting
 CIDR network;
 (k) service continuity in case of a disaster;
 (l) monitoring of equipment, systems and networks;
 (m) measures for fraud prevention and effective remedies
 in case of fraud;
 (n) requirement of entering into non-disclosure agreements
 with the personnel;
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 46 of 567
 (o) provisions for audit of internal systems and networks;
 (p) restrictions on personnel relating to processes, systems
 and networks.
 (q) inclusion of security and confidentiality obligations in the
 agreements or arrangements with the agencies,
 consultants, advisors or other persons engaged by the
 Authority.

 (3) The Authority shall monitor compliance with the
 information security policy and other security requirements
 through internal audits or through independent agencies.

 (4) The Authority shall designate an officer as Chief
 Information Security Officer for disseminating and
 monitoring the information security policy and other
 security-related programmes and initiatives of the Authority.

 xx xx xx

 5. Security obligations of service providers, etc. — The
 agencies, consultants, advisors and other service providers
 engaged by the Authority for discharging any function
 relating to its processes shall:
 (a) ensure compliance with the information security policy
 specified by the Authority;
 (b) periodically report compliance with the information
 security policy and contractual requirements, as required
 by the Authority;
 (c) report promptly to the Authority any security incidents
 affecting the confidentiality, integrity and availability of
 information related to the Authority’s functions;
 (d) ensure that records related to the Authority shall be
 protected from loss, destruction, falsification, unauthorised
 access and unauthorised release;
 (e) ensure confidentiality obligations are maintained during
 the term and on termination of the agreement;
 (f) ensure that appropriate security and confidentiality
 obligations are provided for in their agreements with their
 employees and staff members;
 (g) ensure that the employees having physical access to
 CIDR data centers and logical access to CIDR data centers
 undergo necessary background checks;
 (h) define the security perimeters holding sensitive
 information, and ensure only authorised individuals are
 allowed access to such areas to prevent any data leakage
 or misuse; and

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 47 of 567
 (i) where they are involved in the handling of the biometric
 data, ensure that they use only those biometric devices
 which are certified by a certification body as identified by
 the Authority and ensure that appropriate systems are built
 to ensure security of the biometric data.

 The Aadhaar (Sharing of Information) Regulations, 2016.

 3. Sharing of information by the Authority. — (1) Core
 biometric information collected by the Authority under the
 Act shall not be shared with anyone for any reason
 whatsoever.

 (2) The demographic information and photograph of an
 individual collected by the Authority under the Act may be
 shared by the Authority with a requesting entity in response
 to an authentication request for e-KYC data pertaining to
 such individual, upon the requesting entity obtaining
 consent from the Aadhaar number holder for the
 authentication process, in accordance with the provisions
 of the Act and the Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations,
 2016.

 (3) The Authority shall share authentication records of the
 Aadhaar number holder with him in accordance with
 regulation 28 of the Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations,
 2016.

 (4) The Authority may share demographic information and
 photograph, and the authentication records of an Aadhaar
 number holder when required to do so in accordance with
 Section 33 of the Act.

 xx xx xx

 6. Restrictions on sharing, circulating or publishing of
 Aadhaar number. — (1) The Aadhaar number of an
 individual shall not be published, displayed or posted
 publicly by any person or entity or agency.

 (2) Any individual, entity or agency, which is in possession
 of Aadhaar number(s) of Aadhaar number holders, shall
 ensure security and confidentiality of the Aadhaar numbers
 and of any record or database containing the Aadhaar
 numbers.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 48 of 567
 (3) Without prejudice to sub-regulations (1) and (2), no
 entity, including a requesting entity, which is in possession
 of the Aadhaar number of an Aadhaar number holder, shall
 make public any database or record containing the
 Aadhaar numbers of individuals, unless the Aadhaar
 numbers have been redacted or blacked out through
 appropriate means, both in print and electronic form.

 (4) No entity, including a requesting entity, shall require an
 individual to transmit his Aadhaar number over the Internet
 unless such transmission is secure and the Aadhaar
 number is transmitted in encrypted form except where
 transmission is required for correction of errors or redressal
 of grievances.

 (5) No entity, including a requesting entity, shall retain
 Aadhaar numbers or any document or database containing
 Aadhaar numbers for longer than is necessary for the
 purpose specified to the Aadhaar number holder at the
 time of obtaining consent.”

43) To sum up broadly, the Authority is established under the Act as a

 statutory body which is given the task of developing the policy,

 procedure and system for issuing Aadhaar numbers to individuals

 and also to perform authentication thereof as per the provisions

 of the Act. For the purpose of enrolment and assigning Aadhaar

 numbers, enrolling agencies are recruited by the Authority. All the

 residents in India are eligible to obtain an Aadhaar number. To

 enable a resident to get Aadhaar number, he is required to submit

 demographic as well as biometric information i.e., apart from

 giving information relating to name, date of birth and address,

 biometric information in the form of photograph, fingerprint, iris

 scan is also to be provided. Aadhaar number given to a particular
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 49 of 567
 person is treated as unique number as it cannot be reassigned to

 any other individual.

 Insofar as subsidies, benefits or services to be given by the

 Central Government or the State Government, as the case may

 be, is concerned, these Governments can mandate that receipt of

 these subsidies, benefits and services would be given only on

 furnishing proof of possession of Aadhaar number (or proof of

 making an application for enrolment, where Aadhaar number is

 not assigned). An added requirement is that such individual

 would undergo authentication at the time of receiving such

 benefits etc. A particular institution/body from which the aforesaid

 subsidy, benefit or service is to be claimed by such an individual,

 the intended recipient would submit his Aadhaar number and is

 also required to give her biometric information to that agency. On

 receiving this information and for the purpose of its

 authentication, the said agency, known as Requesting Entity,

 would send the request to the Authority which shall perform the

 job of authentication of Aadhaar number. On confirming the

 identity of a person, the individual is entitled to receive subsidy,

 benefit or service. Aadhaar number is permitted to be used by

 the holder for other purposes as well.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 50 of 567
44) In this whole process, any resident seeking to obtain an Aadhaar

 number is, in the first instance, required to submit her

 demographic information and biometric information at the time of

 enrolment. She, thus, parts with her photograph, fingerprint and

 iris scan at that stage by giving the same to the enrolling agency,

 which may be a private body/person. Likewise, every time when

 such Aadhaar holder intends to receive a subsidy, benefit or

 service and goes to specified/designated agency or person for

 that purpose, she would be giving her biometric information to

 that requesting entity, which, in turn, shall get the same

 authenticated from the Authority before providing a subsidy,

 benefit or service. Whenever request is received for

 authentication by the Authority, record of such a request is kept

 and stored in the CIDR. At the same time, provisions for

 protection of such information/data have been made, as indicated

 above. Aadhaar number can also be used for purposes other

 than stated in the Act i.e. purposes other than provided under

 Section 7 of the Act, as mentioned in Section 57 of the Act, which

 permit the State or any body corporate or person, pursuant to any

 law, for the time being in force, or any contract to this effect, to

 use the Aadhaar number for establishing the identity of an

 individual. It can be used as a proof of identity, like other identity

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 51 of 567
 proofs such as PAN card, ration card, driving licence, passport

 etc.

45) Piercing into the aforesaid Aadhaar programme and its

 formation/structure under the Aadhaar Act, foundational

 arguments are that it is a grave risk to the rights and liberties of

 the citizens of this country which are secured by the Constitution

 of India. It militates against the constitutional abiding values and

 its foundational morality and has the potential to enable an

 intrusive state to become a surveillance state on the basis of

 information that is collected in respect of each individual by

 creation of a joint electronic mesh. In this manner, the Act strikes

 at the very privacy of each individual thereby offending the right

 to privacy which is elevated and given the status of fundamental

 right by tracing it to Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution of

 India by a nine Judge Bench judgment of this Court in K.S.

 Puttaswamy & Anr. v. Union of India & Ors.6. Most of the counsel

 appearing for different petitioners (though not all) conceded that

 there cannot be a serious dispute insofar as allotment of Aadhaar

 number, for the purpose of unique identification of the residents,

 is concerned. However, apprehensions have been expressed

 about the manner in which the Scheme has been rolled out and

6 (2017) 10 SCC 1
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 52 of 567
 implemented. The entire edifice of the aforesaid projection is

 based on the premise that it forces a person, who intends to enrol

 for Aadhaar, to part with his core information namely biometric

 information in the form of fingerprints and iris scan. These are to

 be given to the enrolment agency in the first instance which is a

 private body and, thus, there is risk of misuse of this vital

 information pertaining to an individual. Further, it is argued that

 the most delicate and fragile part, susceptible to misuse, is the

 authentication process which is to be carried out each time the

 holder of Aadhaar number wants to establish her identity. At that

 stage, not only the individual parts with the biometric information

 again with the RE (which may again be a private agency as well),

 the purpose for which such a person approaches the RE would

 also be known i.e. the nature of transaction which is supposed to

 be undertaken by the said person at that time. Such information

 relating to different transactions of a person across the life of the

 citizen is connected to a central database. This record may

 enable the State to profile citizens, track their movements, assess

 their habits and silently influence their behaviour. Over a period

 of time, the profiling would enable the State to stifle dissent and

 influence political decision making. It may also enable the State

 to act as a surveillant state and there is a propensity for it to

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 53 of 567
 become a totalitarian state. It is stressed that at its core, Aadhaar

 alters the relationship between the citizen and the State. It

 diminishes the status of the citizen. Rights freely exercised,

 liberties freely enjoyed, entitlements granted by the Constitution

 and laws are all made conditional, on a compulsory barter. The

 barter compels the citizen to give up her biometrics ‘voluntarily’,

 allow her biometrics and demographic information to be stored by

 the State and private operators and then used for a process

 termed ‘authentication’.

 To put it in nutshell, provisions of the Aadhaar Act are

 perceived by the petitioners as giving away of vital information

 about the residents to the State not only in the form of biometrics

 but also about the movement as well as varied kinds of

 transactions which a resident would enter into from time to time.

 The threat is in the form of profiling the citizens by the State on

 the one hand and also misuse thereof by private agencies

 whether it is enrolling agency or requesting agency or even

 private bodies mentioned in Section 57 of the Act. In essence, it

 is stated that not only data of aforesaid nature is stored by the

 CIDR, which has the threat of being leaked, it can also be

 misused by non-State actors. In other words, it is sought to be

 highlighted that there is no assurance of any data protection at

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 54 of 567
 any level.

46) The respondents, on the other hand, have attempted to shake the

 very foundation of the aforesaid structure of the petitioners’ case.

 They argue that in the first instance, minimal biometric

 information of the applicant, who intends to have Aadhaar

 number, is obtained which is also stored in CIDR for the purpose

 of authentication. Secondly, no other information is stored. It is

 emphasised that there is no data collection in respect of religion,

 caste, tribe, language records of entitlement, income or medical

 history of the applicant at the time of Aadhaar enrolment. Thirdly,

 the Authority also claimed that the entire Aadhaar enrolment eco-

 system is foolproof inasmuch as within few seconds of the

 biometrics having been collected by the enrolling agency, the said

 information gets transmitted the Authorities/CIDR, that too in an

 encrypted form, and goes out of the reach of the enrolling

 agency. Same is the situation at the time of authentication as

 biometric information does not remain with the requesting

 agency. Fourthly, while undertaking the authentication process,

 the Authority simply matches the biometrics and no other

 information is received or stored in respect of purpose, location or

 nature or transaction etc. Therefore, the question of profiling does

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 55 of 567
 not arise at all. A powerpoint presentation was given by Dr. Ajay

 Bhushan Pandey, CEO of the Authority, in the Court, while

 explaining various nuances of the whole process. In this

 presentation, the enrolment process has been projected in the

 following manner:

47) Insofar as Aadhaar authentication service is concerned, it was

 explained that the same is e-KYC wherein following process is

 involved:

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 56 of 567
48) It was asserted with all vehemence that while doing the aforesaid

 authentication, no other information is collected or stored by the

 Authority/CIDR, specifically pointing that:

 (a) The Authority does not collect purpose, location or details of

 transaction. Thus, it is purpose blind.

 (b) The information collected as aforesaid remains in silos.

 (c) Merging of silos is prohibited.

 (d) The RE is provided answer only in Yes or No about the

 authentication of the person concerned.

 (e) The authentication process is not exposed to the internet

 world.

 (f) Security measures as per the provisions of Section 29(3)

 read with Section 38(g) as well as Regulation 17(1)(d) of the

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 57 of 567
 Authentication Regulations are strictly followed and adhere to.

 The Aadhaar Authentication Security has been described in

 the following manner:

49) In this hue, the Authority has projected that the Aadhaar design

 takes full care of privacy and security of the persons. It is sought

 to be demonstrated by pointing out the following features:

 (i) Privacy is ensured by the very design of Aadhaar which was

 conceived by the Authority from very inception and is now even

 incarnated in the Aadhaar Act because : (a) it is backed by

 minimal data, federated databases, optimal ignorance; and (b)

 there is no transaction/pooling data coupled with the fact that

 resident authorised access to identity data is available.

 (ii) Aadhaar is designed for inclusion inasmuch as : (a) there is

 flexibility of demographic data, multi-modal biometrics, and

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 58 of 567
 flexible processes; (b) DDSVP Committee by Dr. V.N. Vittal,

 former CVC; and (c) Biometric design and Standards Committee

 by Dr. Gairola, Former DG, NIC.

 (iii) All security numbers are followed which can be seen from:

 (a) PKI-2048 encryption from the time of capture, (b) adoption of

 best-in-class security standards and practices, and (c) strong

 audit and traceability as well as fraud detection.

50) It was explained that the security and data privacy is ensured in

 the following way:

 (i) The data sent to ABIS is completely anonymised. The ABIS

 systems do not have access to resident’s demographic

 information as they are only sent biometric information of a

 resident with a reference number and asked to de-duplicate. The

 de-duplication result with the reference number is mapped back

 to the correct enrolment number by the Authorities own enrolment

 server.

 (ii) The ABIS providers only provide their software and

 services. The data is stored in UIDAI storage and it never leaves

 the secure premises.

 (iii) The ABIS providers do not store the biometric images

 (source). They only store template for the purpose of de-

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 59 of 567
 duplication (with reference number).

 (iv) The encrypted enrolment packet sent by the enrolment

 client software to the CIDR is decrypted by the enrolment server

 but the decrypted packet is never stored.

 (v) The original biometric images of fingerprints, iris and face

 are archived and stored offline. Hence, they cannot be accessed

 through an online network.

 (vi) The biometric system provides high accuracy of over

 99.86%. The mixed biometric have been adopted only t enhance

 the accuracy and to reduce the errors which may arise on

 account of some residents either not having biometrics or not

 having some particular biometric.

51) Above all, there is an oversight by Technology and Architecture

 Review Board (TARB) and Security Review Committee. This

 Board and Committee consists of very high profiled officers. The

 aforesaid security measures are shown by the Authority in the

 following manner:

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 60 of 567
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 61 of 567
52) We may point out at this stage that to the powerpoint

 presentation by Dr. Pandey on the aforesaid lines, certain

 questions were put to him by Mr. Shyam Divan as well as Mr.

 Vishwanathan, senior advocates, and the answers thereto were

 given by Dr. Pandey. In order to have the complete picture, we

 will be well advised to reproduce these questions and their

 answers as well, which are as follows:

53) Questions and Answers to the queries raised by the petitioners in
 W.P. (C) No. 1056 of 2017 entitled ‘Nachiket Udupa & Anr. v.
 Union of India

 (1) What are the figures for authentication failures, both at the

 national and state level? Please provide a breakup, between

 fingerprints and iris.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 62 of 567
 Ans.: UIDAI cannot provide authentication failure rates at the

 state level since it does not track the location of the authentication

 transactions. Authentication failure rate at national level is as

 below:

 Modality Unique UID Failed Unique ID Failed Percentage
 Participated
 IRIS 1,08,50,391 9,27,132 8.54%
 FINGER 61,63,63,346 3,69,62,619 6.00%

 It must be stated that authentication failures do not mean

 exclusion or denial from subsidies, benefits or services since the

 requesting entities are obliged under the law to provide for

 exception handling mechanisms.

 (2) In case a person who is claiming a biometric exception (e.g.

 a person suffering from leprosy) does not have a mobile phone

 number, or has not given it in the enrolment form, or if the phone

 number changes – how will her Aadhaar enrolment and

 subsequent authentication occur and under which provision of

 law?

 Ans.: Aadhaar enrolment is done for all residents, even of

 residents with leprosy. Biometric exception process is defined in

 the UIDAI resident enrolment process. In the case of a leprosy

 patient, who may not be able to do fingerprint authentication, iris

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 63 of 567
 authentication can be used for update (and add the mobile

 number). This was the reason for multi-modal enrolment and

 authentication being selected for use in Aadhaar.

 Only in an unlikely scenario where both iris and fingerprint

 cannot be used for authentication, the mobile number is one of

 the methods for authentication. In cases where authentication

 through mobile number is not possible or feasible, the requesting

 entities have to provide their own exception and backup

 mechanism to ensure services to Aadhaar holders. As part of the

 exception handling mechanism, UIDAI has already implemented

 a digitally signed QR code into e-Aadhaar which allows agencies

 to verify the Aadhaar card in an off-line manner and trust the data

 (based on digital signature validation) without accessing e-KYC

 API service of UIDAI. This is a simple off-line mechanism to

 quickly verify the legitimacy of the Aadhaar card. But, it does not

 ensure that the person holding the card is the owner of that

 Aadhaar number. It needs either manual check of photo against

 the face of the individual (like the way ID is verified at the entry of

 airports) or some form of electronic authentication using Aadhaar

 authentication API or agency specific authentication scheme. QR

 code based verification allows Aadhaar number holders to use

 their ID on a day-to-day purpose without using online e-KYC

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 64 of 567
 authentication. The verification through offline QR code can be

 used for those purposes or cases where proof of presence or

 proof of ownership of card is not required.

 The Aadhaar Act and Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update)

 Regulations, 2016 define special provision for enrolment of

 residents with biometric exception. Further, as per Regulation

 14(i) of the Authentication Regulations, RE shall implement

 exception-handling mechanisms and backup identity

 authentication mechanisms to ensure seamless provision of

 authentication services to Aadhaar number holders. Accordingly,

 DBT Mission Cabinet Secretariat has issued a detailed circular

 dated December 19, 2017 regarding exception handling during

 use of Aadhaar in the benefit schemes of the Government.

 (3) Are there any surprise checks, field studies done to check

 the authenticity of the exemption registers?

 Ans.: As per Regulation 14(i) of the Authentication Regulations,

 this exception handling mechanism is to be implemented and

 monitored by the requesting entities and in case of the

 Government, their respective Ministries. Further, the DBT

 Mission Cabinet Secretariat had issued Circular dated December

 19, 2017 on exception handling and audit of exceptions.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 65 of 567
 (4) Between the ages of 5-15 years, can a school, as an

 ‘introducer’, enrol a child without parental consent?

 Ans.: School officials, if permitted to act as ‘introducer’, can enrol

 only when there is a parental consent to enrol. The disclosure

 requirement as per Section 3(2) of the Aadhaar Act and the

 Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations, 2016 (Schedule-I)

 is implemented through the enrolment form which is signed by the

 resident making it informed disclosure. In case of children, the

 consent form will be signed by the parent/guardian.

 (5) Once a child attains the age of 18 years, is there any way

 for them to opt out or revoke consent?

 Ans.: It is not permissible under the Aadhaar Act. However,

 residents have the option of permanently locking their biometrics

 and only temporarily unlock it when needed for biometric

 authentication as per Regulation 11 of the Authentication

 Regulations.

 (6) What is the status of the enrolments done by the 49,000

 blacklisted enrolment operators? Please provide the number of

 enrolments done by them?

 Ans.: UIDAI has a policy to enforce the process guidelines and

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 66 of 567
 data quality check during the enrolment process. 100% of the

 enrolment done by operators undergoes a quality assurance

 check, wherein every enrolment passes through a human eye.

 Any Aadhaar enrolment found to be contrary to the UIDAI

 process, the enrolment itself gets rejected and Aadhaar is not

 generated. The resident is advised to re-enroll. Once an

 operator is blacklisted or suspended, further enrolments cannot

 be carried out by him during the time the order of

 blacklisting/suspension is valid.

 (7) What are the total number of biometric De-duplication

 rejections that have taken place till date? In case an enrolment is

 rejected either for: (a) duplicate enrolment and (b) other technical

 reason under Regulation 14 of the Aadhaar Enrolment

 Regulations, what happens to the data packet that contains the

 stored biometric and demographic information?

 Ans.: The total number of biometric de-duplication rejections that

 have taken place are 6.91 crores as on March 21, 2018. These

 figures do not pertain to the number of unique individuals who

 have been denied Aadhaar enrolment resulting in no Aadhaar

 issued to them. This figure merely pertains to the number of

 applications which have been identified by the Aadhaar de-

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 67 of 567
 duplication system as having matching biometrics to an existing

 Aadhaar number holder. The biometric de-duplication system is

 designed to identify as duplicate those cases where any one of

 the biometrics (ten fingers and two irises) match. However, very

 often it is found that all the biometrics match. It is highly

 improbable for the biometrics to match unless the same person

 has applied again. There are a number of reasons why the same

 person might apply more than once. For instance, many

 individuals innocently apply for enrolment multiple times because

 of the delay in getting their Aadhaar cards due to postal delays,

 loss or destruction of their cards or confusion about how the

 system works. Each time one applies for Aadhaar, the system

 identifies her as a new enrolment but when it recognises that the

 individual’s biometrics match with already those in the database,

 thereafter further checks, including manual check through

 experienced personnels, are done. After that exercise, if it is

 found that the person is already registered, it rejects the

 enrolment application. One of their main reasons for rejection is

 that multiple people would put their biometric details like

 fingerprints for Aadhaar generation either as a fraudulent exercise

 or by mistake, which also would get rejected. There were many

 fakes and frauds in the earlier systems and several reports have

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 68 of 567
 found that almost 50% of the subsidies were getting pilfered away

 by fakes and duplicates in the system. Then, there would also be

 several such people who may have tried to defraud the Aadhaar

 enrolment system as well but failed get multiple Aadhaar numbers

 due to the stringent Aadhaar de-duplication process. Thus, the

 mere fact that 6.23 crore enrolments have been rejected as

 biometric duplicates does not mean that 6.23 crore people have

 been denied an Aadhaar number as has been alleged by the

 petitioners. Any genuine person who does not have an Aadhaar

 number and whose enrolment has been rejected can always

 apply again for enrolment. It is worth noting that none of the de-

 duplication rejects have come forward to lodge complaints either

 with the Authority or with the Government about denial of Aadhaar

 number. None of them have even approached any Court of law.

 Evidently, the genuine residents have got themselves re-enrolled

 and the rest are those who were trying to reach the Aadhaar

 system by fraudulent means. That explains why no one has

 approached a court of law complaining denial of Aadhaar number.

 All the enrolment packets received by UIDAI (accepted/rejected)

 are archived in the CIDR irrespective of its status.

 (8) If the figure of rejection of enrolment packets was 8 crore,

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 69 of 567
 as on 2015, what is the total rejection figure for enrolment

 packets as on date? How many field studies/physical verification

 have been done to ensure that these persons (who have been

 rejected) are indeed “False or duplicate” enrolments?

 Ans.: The total rejection figure for enrolment packets is 18.0 cr.

 as on March 26, 2018. These rejections are due to various

 technical reasons like: (i) data quality reject such as address

 incomplete, name incomplete, use of expletives in names,

 address etc. photo is of object, photo of photo, age photo

 mismatch etc.; and (ii) OSI validation reject such as operator /

 supervisor / introducer validation failed, operator / supervisor /

 introducer / Head of Family biometric validation failed etc.

 Those whose enrolments have been rejected for any reason

 and who do not have Aadhaar can re-enrol and obtain Aadhaar.

 Rejection of enrolments do not mean that the person will never be

 able to get Aadhaar.

 (9) What does “any other appropriate response” under Section

 8(4) of the Aadhaar Act include?

 Ans.: “Any other appropriate responses” includes e-KYC or

 limited e-KYC data. As per Regulation 3 of Authentication

 Regulations, UIDAI provides two types of authentication facilities,

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 70 of 567
 namely -

 (i) Yes/No authentication facility; and

 (ii) e-KYC authentication facility.

 In Yes/No authentication, UIDAI provides the response as

 Yes or No along with relevant error codes, if any.

 In e-KYC authentication, UIDAI provides the demographic

 data along with photograph and in case of mismatch/error, the

 relevant error codes.

54) Questions and Answers to the queries raised by the petitioners in
 W.P. (C) No. 829 of 2013 entitled ‘S.G. Vombatkere & Anr. v.
 Union of India

 (1) Please confirm that no UIDAI official verifies the correctness

 of documents offered at the stage of enrolment/updating.

 Ans.: As per UIDAI process, the verification of the documents is

 entrusted to the Registrar. For Verification based on Documents,

 the verifier present at the Enrolment Centre will verify the

 documents. Registrars/Enrolment agency must appoint personnel

 for the verification of documents.

 (2) Please confirm that UIDAI does not know whether the

 documents shown at the time of enrolment/updating are genuine

 or false.

 Ans.: The answer is same as in (1) above.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 71 of 567
 (3) Please confirm:

 (a) UIDAI does not identify the persons it only matches the

 biometric information received at the time of authentication with

 its records and provides a Yes/No response;

 Ans.: Biometric authentication of an Aadhaar number holder is

 always performed as 1:1 biometric match against his/her Aadhaar

 number (identity) in CIDR. Based on the match, UIDAI provides

 Yes or No response. A “Yes” response means a positive

 identification of the Aadhaar number holder.

 Each enrolment is biometrically de-duplicated against all

 (1.2 billion) residents to issue the Aadhaar number (or Unique

 Identity).

 (b) UIDAI takes no responsibility with respect to the correctness

 of the name, date of birth or address of the person enrolled.

 Ans.: The Name/Address/DOB are derived from the Proof of

 Identity (POI)/Proof of Address (POA) documents submitted

 during enrolments.

 The enrolment/update packet (encrypted) retains a scanned

 copy of the POI/POA documents used for the enrolment which

 can be reviewed in case of dispute.

 UIDAI maintains the update history of each Aadhaar

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 72 of 567
 number related to changes in name, address, date of birth etc.

 (4) Please confirm:

 (a) UIDAI takes no responsibility with respect to the correct

 identification of a person.

 Ans.: Please refer to Answer (1) above. Additionally, it may be

 stated that enrolment of Aadhaar is done through a resident

 enrolment process and verification of the POI/POA document is

 done against the acceptable documents, as per the UIDAI valid

 list of documents as provided in Schedule II and III Aadhaar

 (Enrolment and Update) Regulations, 2016 read with Regulation

 10.

 UIDAI takes responsibility in creating and implementing

 standards, ensuring matching systems installed in CIDR work as

 they are designed to do, and providing options to Aadhaar

 holders in terms of controlling their identity (such as updating their

 data, locking their biometrics, etc.) and accessing their own

 authentication records. One of the key goals of Aadhaar is to

 issue a unique identity for the residents of India. Hence, each

 enrolment is biometrically de-duplicated against all (1.2 billion)

 residents to issue the Aadhaar number (or Unique Identity).

 Section 4 of Aadhaar lays down the properties of an

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 73 of 567
 Aadhaar number. Sub-section (3) of Section 4 reads as under:

 “(3) An Aadhaar number, in physical or electronic form
 subject to authentication and other conditions, as may be
 specified by regulations, may be accepted as proof of
 identity of the Aadhaar number holder for any purpose.”

 The requesting entities are at liberty to use any or multiple

 of authentication mode available under Regulation 4 of Aadhaar

 (Authentication) Regulation, 2016 as per their requirements and

 needs of security etc.

 (b) The biometric authentication is based on a probabilistic

 match of the biometric captured during authentication and the

 record stored with CIDR.

 Ans.: Biometric authentication is based on 1:1 matching and,

 therefore, in that sense it is not probabilistic. If biometrics are

 captured it will lead to successful authentication. If biometrics are

 not well captured during authentication or an impostor tries

 authentication, it will lead to authentication failure. Aadhaar Proof

 of Concept studies show that a vast majority of residents (>98%)

 can successfully authenticate using biometric modalities such

 fingerprints and/or iris.

 However, the Aadhaar Act and Regulations provides that an

 Aadhaar number holder cannot be denied service due to the

 failure of Aadhaar authentication. Hence, all Aadhaar

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 74 of 567
 applications must implement exception processes. Possible

 methods to implement the exception process include:

 (i) Family Based Authentication: Family based applications

 such as PDS or Health applications may allow authentication by

 family members to allow resident to avail services.

 (ii) Alternate Modalities: Some applications may use different

 modalities for exception handling. Alternate modalities include:

 (a) Iris Authentication

 (b) OTP Authentication (if allowed by policy)

 (iii) Biometric Fusion: UIDAI is introducing face authentication

 as secondary authentication factor to reduce the rate of

 authentication failures, especially for senior citizens. At this time,

 face authentication will be used only conjunction with another

 authentication factor such as finger/iris/OTP.

 (a) Face + Finger Fusion

 (b) Face + Iris Fusion

 (c) Face + OTP Fusion

 (iv) Non Aadhaar Based Exception process: Applications may

 implement non-Aadhaar based exception process to ensure that

 no resident is denied service. Applications need to monitor the

 use of exceptions in their applications to prevent misuse of the

 exception process.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 75 of 567
 (v) Accordingly, DBT Mission Cabinet Secretariat had issued a

 detailed circular dated December 19, 2017 regarding use of

 Aadhaar in benefit schemes of Government – exception handling.

 (5) Please confirm that with respect to individuals under 15

 years and over 60 years of age, biometric authentication is likely

 to fail due to changes in/fading of biometrics such as fingerprints.

 Ans.: Though there is no conclusive evidence to say that

 biometric authentication success is dependent upon age, slightly

 higher authentication failure rates have been observed only for

 fingerprints for senior citizens above the age of 70. A number of

 exception processes are provided in answer to Question 4(b)

 above to prevent denial of service for failure of authentication.

 Further, in case of any issue in biometric authentication, an

 Aadhaar number holder may update his/her biometric at any of

 the Aadhaar enrolment centres, which is also provided for in the

 Aadhaar Act.

 (6) Please confirm that the reasons why over 49000 enrolment

 operators were blacklisted include: (i) failure to verify documents

 presented; (ii) failure to maintain records of documents submitted;

 (iii) misuse of information submitted; and (iv) aiding or abetting

 false enrolments?

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 76 of 567
 Ans.: UIDAI has a policy to enforce the process guidelines and

 data quality check during the enrolment process. 100% of the

 enrolments done by operators undergoes a quality assurance

 check. If any Aadhaar enrolment is found to be not as per the

 UIDAI process, the enrolment itself gets rejected and Aadhaar is

 not generated. If such mistake by an operator crosses a

 threshold defined in the policy, the operator is blacklisted/

 removed from the UIDAI ecosystem. As such, of the 49,000

 operators who have been blacklisted/removed from the UIDAI

 eco-system, all the enrolments which were in violation of the

 process were rejected in the QA stage. Enrolment operators may

 be blacklisted for the following reasons:

  illegally charging the resident for Aadhaar enrolment

  poor demographic data quality

  invalid biometric exceptions

  other process malpractice

 (7) Please confirm:

 (a) At the stage of enrolment, there is no verification as to

 whether a person is an illegal immigrant.

 (b) At the stage of enrolment, there is no verification about a

 person being resident in India for 182 days or more in the past 12

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 77 of 567
 months.

 (c) Foreign nationals may enrol and are issued Aadhaar

 numbers.

 (d) Persons retain their Aadhaar number even after they cease

 to be resident. This is true of foreign nationals as well.

 Ans.:

 (a) At the time of enrolment, verification is done based upon

 documents provided by the resident. In case any violation of

 prescribed guidelines comes to light, the concerned Aadhaar is

 omitted/deactivated.

 (b) This has been included through the enrolment form where

 resident undertakes and signs the disclosure:

 “Disclosure under Section 3(2) of the Aadhaar (Targeted
 Delivery of Financial And Other Subsidies, Benefits and
 Services) Act, 2016

 I confirm that I have been residing in India for at least 182
 days in the preceding 12 months & information (including
 biometrics) provided by me to the UIDAI is my own and is
 true, correct and accurate. I am aware that my information
 (including biometrics) will be used for generation of
 Aadhaar and authentication. I understand that my identity
 information (except core biometric) may be provided to an
 agency only with my consent during authentication or as
 per the provisions of the Aadhaar Act. I have a right to
 access my identity information (except core biometrics)
 following the procedure laid down by UIDAI.”

 (c) Aadhaar is issued to the resident of India and the word

 ‘resident’ is defined in Section 2(v) of the Aadhaar Act. Aadhaar

 numbers may be issued to foreign nationals who are resident in
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 78 of 567
 India. Section 2(v) reads as under:

 “ ‘resident’ means an individual who has resided in India for
 a period or periods amounting in all to one hundred and
 eighty-two days or more in the twelve months immediately
 preceding the date of application for enrolment;”

 A foreign national fulfilling the above criteria is eligible for

 Aadhaar, provided he submits the acceptable POI/POA document

 as per the UIDAI valid list of documents.

 (d) As per the Aadhaar Act, an Aadhaar number is issued to a

 resident who has been residing in India for at least 182 days in

 the preceding 12 months. An Aadhaar number is issued to an

 individual for life and may be omitted/deactivated in case of

 violation of prescribed guidelines only. Ineligibility of a person to

 retain an Aadhaar number owing to become non-resident may be

 treated as a ground for deactivation of Aadhaar number and

 Regulation 28(l)(f) of the Aadhaar Enrolment Regulations. This is

 in keeping with Section 31(1) and (3) of the Aadhaar Act wherein

 it is an obligation on an Aadhaar number holder to inform the

 UIDAI of changes in demographic information and for the

 Authority to make the necessary alteration.

 (8) Please confirm the Points Of Service (POS) biometric

 readers are capable of storing biometric information.

 Ans.: UIDAI has mandated use of Registered Devices (RD) for
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 79 of 567
 all authentication requests. With RDs, biometric data is signed

 within the device/RD service using the provider key to ensure it is

 indeed captured live. The device provider RD service encrypts

 the PID block before returning to the host application. This RD

 service encapsulates the biometric capture, signing and

 encryption of biometrics all within it. Therefore, introduction of

 RD in Aadhaar authentication system rules out any possibility of

 use of stored biometric and replay of biometrics captured from

 other source. Requesting entities are not legally allowed to store

 biometrics captured for Aadhaar authentication under Regulation

 17(1)(a) of the Authentication Regulations.

 (9) Referring to slide/page 13, please confirm that the

 architecture under the Aadhaar Act includes: (i) authentication

 user agencies (e.g. Kerala Dairy Farmers Welfare Fund Board);

 (ii) authentication service agencies (e.g. Airtel); and (iii) CIDR.

 Ans.: UIDAI appoints Requesting Entities (AUA/KUA) and

 Authentication Service Agency (ASA) as per Regulation 12 of

 Authentication Regulations. List of Requesting Entitles

 (AUA/KUA) and Authentication Service Agency appointed by

 UIDAI is available on UIDAI’s website. An AUA/KUA can do

 authentication on behalf of other entities under Regulation 15 and

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 80 of 567
 Regulation 16.

 (10) Please confirm that one or more entitles in the Aadhaar

 architecture described in the previous paragraph record the date

 and time of the authentication, the client IP, the device ID and

 purpose of authentication.

 Ans.: UIDAI does not ask requesting entities to maintain any logs

 related to IP address of the device, GPS coordinates of the

 device and purpose of authentication. However, AUAs like banks,

 telecom etc., in order to ensure that their systems are secure,

 frauds are managed, they may store additional information as per

 their requirement under their respective laws to secure their

 system. Section 32(3) of the Aadhaar Act specifically prevents

 the UIDAI from either by itself or through any entity under its

 control to keep or maintain any information about the purpose of

 authentication.

 Requesting entities are mandated to maintain following logs

 as per Regulation 18 of the Authentication Regulations. These

 are:

 (i) the Aadhaar number against which authentication is

 sought;

 (ii) specified parameters of authentication request

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 81 of 567
 submitted;

 (iii) specified parameters received as authentication

 response;

 (iv) the record of disclosure of information to the Aadhaar

 number holder at the time of authentication; and

 (v) record of consent of the Aadhaar number holder for

 authentication, but shall not, in any event, retain the PID

 information.

 Further, even if a requesting entity captures any other data

 as per their own requirement, UIDAI will only audit the

 authentication logs maintained by the requesting entity as per

 Regulation 18(1) of the Authentication Regulations.

 ASAs are not permitted to maintain any logs related to IP

 address of the device, GPS coordinates of the device etc. ASAs

 are mandated to maintain logs as per Regulation 20 of the

 Authentication Regulations:

 (i) identity of the requesting entity;

 (ii) parameters of authentication request submitted; and

 (iii) parameters received as authentication response.

 Provided that no Aadhaar number, PID information, device

 identity related data and e-KYC response data, where applicable,

 shall be retained.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 82 of 567
 (11) Referring to slide/page 7 and 14, please confirm that

 ‘traceability’ features enable UIDAI to track the specific device

 and its location from where each and every authentication takes

 place.

 Ans.: UIDAI gets the AUA code, ASA code, unique device code,

 registered device code used for authentication. UIDAI does not

 get any information related to the IP address or the GPS location

 from where authentication is performed as these parameters are

 not part of authentication (v2.0) and e-KYC (v2.1) API UIDAI

 would only know from which device the authentication has

 happened, through which AUA/ASA etc. This is what the slides

 meant by traceability. UIDAI does not receive any information

 about at what location the authentication device is deployed, its

 IP address and its operator and the purpose of authentication.

 Further, the UIDAI or any entity under its control is statutorily

 barred from collecting, keeping or maintaining any information

 about the purpose of authentication under Section 32(3) of the

 Aadhaar Act.

Summing up the Scheme:

55) The whole architecture of Aadhaar is devised to give unique

 identity to the citizens of this country. No doubt, a person can

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 83 of 567
 have various documents on the basis of which that individual can

 establish her identify. It may be in the form of a passport,

 Permanent Account Number (PAN) card, ration card and so on.

 For the purpose of enrolment itself number of documents are

 prescribed which an individual can produce on the basis of which

 Aadhaar card can be issued. Thus, such documents, in a way,

 are also proof of identity. However, there is a fundamental

 difference between the Aadhaar card as a mean of identity and

 other documents through which identity can be established.

 Enrolment for Aadhaar card also requires giving of demographic

 information as well as biometric information which is in the form

 of iris and fingerprints. This process eliminates any chance of

 duplication. It is emphasised that an individual can manipulate

 the system by having more than one or even number of PAN

 cards, passports, ration cards etc. When it comes to obtaining

 Aadhaar card, there is no possibility of obtaining duplicate card.

 Once the biometric information is stored and on that basis

 Aadhaar card is issued, it remains in the system with the

 Authority. Wherever there would be a second attempt for

 enrolling for Aadhaar and for this purpose same person gives his

 biometric information, it would immediately get matched with the

 same biometric information already in the system and the second

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 84 of 567
 request would stand rejected. It is for this reason the Aadhaar

 card is known as Unique Identification (UID). Such an identity is

 unparalleled.

56) There is, then, another purpose for having such a system of

 issuing unique identification cards in the form of Aadhaar card. A

 glimpse thereof is captured under the heading ‘Introduction’

 above while mentioning how and under what circumstances the

 whole project was conceptualised. To put it tersely, in addition to

 enabling any resident to obtain such unique identification proof, it

 is also to empower marginalised section of the society,

 particularly those who are illiterate and living in abject poverty or

 without any shelter etc. It gives identity to such persons also.

 Moreover, with the aid of Aadhaar card, they can claim various

 privileges and benefits etc. which are actually meant for these

 people.

 Identity of a person has a significance for every individual in

 his/her life. In a civilised society every individual, on taking birth,

 is given a name. Her place of birth and parentage also becomes

 important as she is known in the society and these demographic

 particulars also become important attribute of her personality.

 Throughout their lives, individuals are supposed to provide such

 information: be it admission in a school or college or at the time of
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 85 of 567
 taking job or engaging in any profession or business activity, etc.

 When all this information is available in one place, in the form of

 Aadhaar card, it not only becomes unique, it would also qualify as

 a document of empowerment. Added with this feature, when an

 individual knows that no other person can clone her, it assumes

 greater significance.

57) Thus, the scheme by itself can be treated as laudable when it

 comes to enabling an individual to seek Aadhaar number, more

 so, when it is voluntary in nature. Howsoever benevolent the

 scheme may be, it has to pass the muster of constitutionality.

 According to the petitioners, the very architecture of Aadhaar is

 unconstitutional on various grounds, glimpse whereof can be

 provided at this stage:

Gist of the challenge to the Aadhaar Scheme as well as the Act:

58) The petitioners accept that the case at hand is unique, simply

 because of the reason that the programme challenged here is

 itself without precedent. According to them, no democratic

 society has adopted a programme that is similar in its command

 and sweep. The case is about a new technology that the

 Government seeks to deploy and a new architecture of

 governance that it seeks to build on this technology. The

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 86 of 567
 petitioners are discrediting the Government’s claim that biometric

 technology employed and the Aadhaar Act is greatly beneficial.

 As per the petitioners, this is an inroad into the rights and liberties

 of the citizens which the Constitution of India guarantees. It is

 intrusive in nature. At its core, Aadhaar alters the relationship

 between the citizen and the State. It diminishes the status of the

 citizens. Rights freely exercised, liberties freely enjoyed,

 entitlements granted by the Constitution and laws are all made

 conditional, on a compulsory barter. The barter compels the

 citizens to give up their biometrics ‘voluntarily’, allow their

 biometrics and demographic information to be stored by the State

 and private operators and then used for a process termed

 ‘authentication’. According to them, by the very scheme of the

 Act and the way it operates, it has propensity to cause ‘civil

 death’ of an individual by simply switching of Aadhaar of that

 person. It is the submission of the petitioners that the

 Constitution balances rights of individuals against State interest.

 The Aadhaar completely upsets this balance and skews the

 relationship between the citizen and the State enabling the State

 to totally dominate the individual.

59) The challenge is directed at the constitutional validity of the

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 87 of 567
 following facets of Aadhaar:

 (i) The Aadhaar programme that operated between January

 28, 2009 until the bringing into force of the Aadhaar Act on

 July 12, 2016.

 (ii) The Aadhaar Act (and alternatively certain provisions of

 that Act).

 (iii) Elements of the Aadhaar project or programme that

 continues to operate, though not within the cover of the

 Aadhaar Act.

 (iv) Specific Regulations framed under the Aadhaar Act,

 illustratively the Aadhaar (Authentication) Regulations,

 2016.

 (v) A set of subordinate legislation in the form of statutory

 rules/regulations including the Money Laundering

 (Amendment) Rules, 2017.

 (vi) All notifications (nearly 139) issued under Section 7 of the

 Aadhaar Act (assuming the Act is upheld) insofar as they

 make Aadhaar mandatory for availing certain

 benefits/services/subsidies, including PDS, MGNREGA

 and social security pension.

 (vii) Actions on the part of the authorities to make Aadhaar

 mandatory even where not covered by Section 7, inter

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 88 of 567
 alia: Actions by CBSE, NEET, JEE and UGC requirements

 for scholarship.

 (viii) Specifically, actions on part of the Government mandating

 linking of mobile phones and Aadhaar vide DoT circular

 dated March 23, 2017.

 (ix) Section 139AA of the Income Tax Act, 1961 insofar as it

 violates Article 21 by mandating linking Aadhaar to PAN

 and requiring Aadhaar linkage for filing returns.

60) Apart from the declaratory reliefs regarding ultra vires and

 certiorari to quash the provisions/actions enumerated above,

 there are certain other reliefs that are also sought, including:

 (i) Suitable declarations regarding the physical autonomy of a

 person over her own body qua the Indian State.

 (ii) Mandatory directions requiring the respondents to give an

 option to persons who are enrolled with the Aadhaar

 programme to opt out and to delete the data with suitable

 certification for compliance.

 (iii) Mandatory directions to all concerned authorities that

 should the Aadhaar Act, etc. be upheld, nevertheless,

 every person must be entitled to avail services, benefits

 etc. through alternative means of identification.

 Negatively, nothing can be withheld from a citizen merely
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 89 of 567
 because he/she does not have an Aadhaar Card or does

 not wish to use their Aadhaar Card.

 (iv) Mandatory directions consistent with the fundamental right

 to privacy and the right of a citizen to be let alone that no

 electronic trial or record of his/her authentication be

 maintained.

61) On the aforesaid premise, the petitioners point out following

 heads of challenge:

Surveillance:

62) The project creates the architecture for pervasive surveillance

 and unless the project is stopped, it will lead to an Orwellian State

 where every move of the citizen is constantly tracked and

 recorded by the State. The architecture of the project comprises

 a Central Identities Data Repository (CIDR) which stores and

 maintains authentication transaction data. The authentication

 record comprises the time of authentication and the identity of the

 requesting entity. Based on this architecture it is possible for the

 State to track down the location of the person seeking

 authentication. Since the requesting entity is also identified, the

 activity that the citizen is engaging in is also known.

Violation of Fundamental Right to Privacy:
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 90 of 567
63) The fundamental right to privacy is breached by the Aadhaar

 project and the Aadhaar Act in numerous ways. Following are the

 illustrations given by the petitioners:

 (a) Between 2009-10 and July 2016 the project violated the

 right to privacy with respect to personal demographic as well as

 biometric information collected, stored and shared as there was

 no law authorising these actions.

 (b) During both the pre-Act and post-Act periods, the project

 continues to violate the right to privacy by requiring individuals to

 part with demographic as well as biometric information to private

 enrolling agencies.

 (c) By enabling private entities to use the Aadhaar

 authentication platform, the citizen’s right to informational privacy

 is violated inasmuch as the citizen is compelled to ‘report’ his/her

 actions to the State.

 (d) Even where a person is availing of a subsidy, benefit or

 service from the State, mandatory authentication through the

 Aadhaar platform (without an option to the citizen to use an

 alternative mode of identification) violates the right to

 informational privacy.

 (e) With Aadhaar being made compulsory for holding a bank

 account, operating a cell phone, having a valid PAN, holding

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 91 of 567
 mutual funds, securing admission to school, taking a board

 examination, etc. the citizen has no option but to obtain Aadhaar.

 Compelling the citizen to part with biometric information violates

 individual autonomy and dignity.

 (f) In a digital society an individual has the right to protect

 himself by controlling the dissemination of personal information,

 including biometric information. Compelling an individual to

 establish his identity by planting her biometric at multiple points of

 service violates privacy involving the person.

 (g) The seeding of Aadhaar in distinct databases enables the

 content of information about an individual that is stored in

 different silos to be aggregated. This enables the State to build

 complete profiles of individuals violating privacy through the

 convergence of data.

Limited Government:

64) A fundamental feature of the Constitution is the sovereignty of the

 people with limited Government authority. The Constitution limits

 governmental authority in various ways, amongst them

 Fundamental Rights, the distribution of powers amongst organs

 of the State and the ultimate check by way of judicial review. The

 Aadhaar project is destructive of the limited Government. The

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 92 of 567
 Constitution is not about the power of the State, but about the

 limits on the power of the State. Post Aadhaar, the State will

 completely dominate the citizen and alter the relationship

 between citizen and the State. The features of a totalitarian state

 is seen from:

 (a) A person cannot conduct routine activities such as operating

 a bank account, holding an investment in mutual funds, receiving

 government pension, receiving scholarship, receiving food

 rations, operating a mobile phone without the State knowing

 about these activities.

 (b) The State can build a profile of the individual based on the

 trial of authentication from which the nature of the citizen’s activity

 can be determined.

 (c) By disabling Aadhaar the State can cause civil death of the

 person.

 (d) By making Aadhaar compulsory for other activities such as

 air travel, rail travel, directorship in companies, services and

 benefits extended by the State Governments and Municipal

 Corporations, etc. there will be virtually no zone of activity left

 where the citizen is not under the gaze of the State. This will

 have a chilling effect on the citizen.

 (e) In such a society, there is little or no personal autonomy.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 93 of 567
 The State is pervasive, and dignity of the individual stands

 extinguished.

 (f) This is an inversion of the accountability in the Right to

 Information age: instead of the State being transparent to the

 citizen, it is the citizen who is rendered transparent to the State.

Impugned Act illegally passed as a ‘Money Bill’:

65) The Bill No. 47 of 2016 introduced in the Lok Sabha and which

 upon passage became the impugned Act was not a Money Bill in

 terms of Article 110 of the Constitution of India. Even though the

 object and purpose of the impugned legislation states that it is to

 be used for the delivery of subsidies, benefits and services,

 expenditure for which is incurred from the Consolidated Fund of

 India, the scope of the impugned Act is far beyond what is

 envisaged under Article 110. Inasmuch as the impugned Act has

 not followed the constitutional procedure mandated for the

 passage of a law by disguising the statute as a ‘Money Bill’, there

 is no valid legislative process that has been followed in this case.

 The legislative process being colourable and since judicial review

 extends wherever Part III rights are violated, the Aadhaar Act is

 liable to be struck down.

Procedure followed violates Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution:

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 94 of 567
66) The procedure adopted by the respondents, both pre-Act and

 post-Act, is arbitrary and in violation of Articles 14 and 21 of the

 Constitution because:

 (a) There is no informed consent at the time of enrolment.

 Individuals are not told about crucial aspects such as potential

 misuse of the information, the commercial value of the

 information, the storage of information in a centralised database,

 that the information supplied could be used against the individual

 in criminal proceedings pursuant to a court order, there is no opt-

 out option, the entire enrolment process is conducted by private

 entities without any governmental supervision, etc.

 (b) UIDAI has no direct relationship with the enrolling agency

 which collects sensitive personal information (biometric and

 demographic).

 (c) The data collected and uploaded in to the CIDR is not

 verified by any Government official designated by the UIDAI. The

 data collected and stored lacks integrity.

 (d) The procedure at the stage of enrolment and authentication

 enables the enrolling agency as well as the ‘requesting entity’ to

 capture, store and misuse/use the biometric as well as

 demographic information without the UIDAI having any control

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 95 of 567
 over such misuse/use.

Unreliability of Biometrics and Exclusion:

67) The foundation of the project, i.e. biometrics, is an unreliable and

 untested technology. Moreover, biometric exceptions severely

 erode reliability. The biometric authentication system works on a

 probabilistic model. Consequently, entitlements are reduced from

 certainty to a chance delivery where the biometrics match.

 Across the country several persons are losing out on their

 entitlements, for say food rations, because of a biometric

 mismatch resulting in them being excluded from various welfare

 schemes. The project is not an ‘identity’ project but an

 ‘identification’ exercise. Unless the biometrics work, a person in

 flesh and blood, does not exist for the State.

Illegal Object:

68) It is submitted before us that the objective of creating a single

 pervasive identification over time is itself illegal. There are

 several facets to the illegality and amongst them is the very

 negation of an individual citizen’s freedom to identify through

 different means. The coercive foundation of the impugned Act is

 in substance an illegal objective that renders the statute ultra

 vires Article 14 of the Constitution of India.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 96 of 567
Democracy, Identity and Choice:

69) A citizen or resident in a democratic society has a choice to

 identify himself/herself through different modes in the course of

 his/her interactions generally in society as well as his/her

 interactions with the State. Mandating identification by only one

 highly intrusive mode is excessive, disproportionate and violates

 Articles 14, 19 and 21.

Children:

70) As per the petitioners, there is no justification to include children

 in the Aadhaar programme for various reasons.

71) It may also be recorded at this juncture itself that insofar as the

 Aadhaar Act is concerned, following provisions thereof are

 specifically attacked as unconstitutional:

 (i) Section 2(c) and 2(d) - authentication and authentication

 record, read with Section 32

 (ii) Section 2(h) read with Section 10 of CIDR

 (iii) Section 2(l) read with Regulation 23 of the Aadhaar

 (Enrolment and Updates) Regulation - ‘enrolling agency’

 (iv) Section 2(v) - ‘resident’

 (v) Section 3 – Aadhaar Number

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 97 of 567
 (vi) Section 5 – Special treatment to children

 (vii) Section 6 – Update of information

 (viii) Section 7

 (ix) Section 8

 (x) Section 9

 (xi) Chapter IV – Sections 11 to 23

 (xii) Sections 23 and 54 – excessive delegation

 (xiii) Section 23(2)(g) read with Chapter VI & VII – Regulations

 27 to 32 of the Aadhaar (Enrolment and Update) Regulations,

 2016

 (xiv) Section 29

 (xv) Section 33

 (xvi) Section 47

 (xvii) Section 48 – Power of Central Government to supersede

 UIDAI

 (xviii) Section 57

 (xix) Section 59

Some Introductory Remarks:

72) Before proceeding further, it would be necessary to state here the

 approach which we have adopted in dealing with various issues

 that are raised in these petitions. That may help in understanding

 the manner in which the matter is dealt with. This necessitates
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 98 of 567
 some introductory remarks:

 (i) We may remark at this stage itself that many of the heads of

 challenge which are taken note of above are overlapping and,

 therefore, discussion on one aspect may provide substantial

 answers to the arguments advanced under the other head of

 challenge as well. Our endeavour, therefore, would be to eschew

 the repetitive discussion. However, our anxiety to bring clarity

 and also in order to have continuity of thought while discussing a

 particular head, may have led to some repetitions at different

 places. In any case, we would be dealing with the various heads

 of challenge, one by one, so as to cover the entire spectrum.

 (ii) In order to have a smooth flow of discussion, we are going

 to formulate the questions which arise in all these petitions and

 then decide those issues. Since, number of advocates 7 appeared

 on both sides, many of the arguments addressed by them were

 overlapping and repetitive. In this scenario, we deem it proper to

 collate the arguments of all the counsel and present the same

 while undertaking the discussion on each of the issues. Thus, in

 the process, we would not be referring to each counsel and her

 arguments. We may, however, intend to place on record that all

7 S/Shri Kapil Sibal, Gopal Subramaniam, P. Chidambaram, Shyam Divan, K.V. Viswanathan,
 Neeraj Kishan Kaul, C.U. Singh, Anand Grover, Sanjay R. Hegde, Arvind P. Datar, V. Giri,
 Rakesh Dwivedi, Jayant Bhushan, Sajan Poovayya, P.V. Surendra Nath, Senior Advocates, K.K.
 Venugopal, Attorney General for India, Tushar Mehta, Additional Solicitor General of India,
 Gopal Sankaranarayanan and Zoheb Hossain, Advocates.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 99 of 567
 the counsel on both sides had taken the advocacy to its highest

 level by presenting all possible nuances of the complex issues

 involved. In the process, plethora of literature on such issues,

 including the law prevailing across the Globe was cited. We,

 therefore, place on record our appreciation of the sublime nature

 of lawyering in this case.

 (iii) As pointed out above, many number of foreign judgments

 were cited during arguments. The history of this Court reflects

 that this Court has liberally accepted the good practices, rules of

 interpretation and norms of constitutional courts of other

 jurisdictions. In fact, in drafting Indian Constitution itself, the

 framing fathers had studied various foreign models and adopted

 provisions from different Constitutions after deep reflection.

 Constitutional influences of system prevailing in some of the

 countries on Indian Constitution can be summarised as under:

 From UK - Parliamentary Type of Government
 - Cabinet System of Ministers
 - Bicameral Parliament
 - Lower House more powerful
 - Council of Minsters responsible to Lower
 House
 From US - Written Constitution
 - Executive head of State known as President
 and his being the Supreme Commander of
 the Armed Forces
 - Vice-President as the ex-officio Chairman of
 Rajya Sabha
 - Bill of Rights
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 100 of 567
 - Supreme Court
 - Provision of States
 - Independence of Judiciary and judicial
 review
 - Preamble
 - Removal of Supreme Court and High Court
 Judges
 From USSR - Fundamental Duties
 - Five Year Plan
 From Australia - Concurrent List
 - Language of the preamble
 - Provision regarding trade, commerce and
 intercourse
 From Japan - Law on which the Supreme Court function
 From Weimar - Suspension of Fundamental Rights during
 Constitution of the emergency
 Germany
 From Canada - Scheme of federation with a strong centre
 - Distribution of powers between the centre
 and the states and placing residuary powers
 with the centre
 From Ireland - Concept of Directive Principles of States
 Policy
 - Method of election of President
 - Nomination of members in the Rajya Sabha
 by the President

 It was, therefore, but natural to find out the manner in which

 particular provisions have been interpreted by the constitutional

 courts of the aforesaid countries. Case law of this Court would

 reflect this for interpreting the provisions relating to ‘Inter-State

 Trade, Commerce & Intercourse’. The case law of the Australian

 High Court is liberally referred as this Chapter is influenced by the

 provisions contained in the Australian Constitution. Likewise, for

 interpreting provisions of Part IX of the Constitution on ‘Relations
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 101 of 567
 between the Union and the States’ where Canadian model is

 followed, the judgments of Canadian Supreme Court have been

 cited by this Court from time to time. Influence of U.S.

 Constitutionalism, tempered by the wish to preserve India’s own

 characteristics, while interpreting chapter relating to fundamental

 rights as well as power of judicial review is also discernible. A

 critical analysis of the various judgments of this Court, where

 foreign precedents are cited8, formulates four typologies of use,

 namely:

 (a) Where the court relies on foreign precedents for guidance

 on general constitutional principles and when necessary to;

 (b) Where the court frames the issue posed for adjudication

 and/or to formulate evaluative test and frameworks;

 (c) To distinguish the country’s context from the foreign one 9;

 (d) To ‘read’ in the Constitution implied or unenumerated

 rights10.

 It can be said that though this Court has been liberally

 relying upon the judgments of the constitutional courts of other

 countries, particularly when it comes to human rights discourse,

 at the same time, in certain situations, note of caution is also

8 Thiruvengadam, The Use of Foreign Law in Constitutional Cases in India and Singapore (2010)
9 Basheshar Nath v. Commissioner of Income Tax, Delhi and Rajasthan & Anr., 1959 Supp (1)
 SCR 528
10 Romesh Thappar v. State of Madras, 1950 SCR 594
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 102 of 567
 added to give a message that the judgment of other jurisdiction

 cannot be relied blindly and it would depend as to whether a

 particular judgment will fit in Indian context or not. As a matter of

 fact, in Basheshar Nath, the Court discussed the doctrine of

 waiver in force in the United States and rejected it firmly stating

 that:

 :...the doctrine of waiver enunciated by some American
 Judges in construing the American Constitution cannot be
 introduced in our Constitution...We are not for the moment
 convinced that this theory has any relevancy in construing
 the fundamental rights conferred by Part III of the
 Constitution.”

 On the contrary, in Romesh Thappar, the Court completely

 based its decision to strike down a law restricting the free

 circulation of newspapers on two US precedents, Ex parte

 Jackson11 and Lovell v. City of Griffin12, and affirmed that the

 protection of freedom of expression in India follows the maxim of

 Madison that the Court transposed from its quotation in Near v.

 Minnesota13, according to which ‘it is better to leave a few of its

 noxious branches to their luxuriant growth, than, by pruning them

 away, to injure the vigour of those yielding the proper fruits’.

 Likewise, the role of foreign precedents in a majority opinion is

 confirmed in the decision of His Holiness Kesavananda Bharati

11 Ex Parte Jackson, 96 US 727 (1878).
12 Lovell v. City of Griffin, 303 US 444 (1938).
13 Near v. Minnesota, 282 US 607 (1931) 717-18.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 103 of 567
 Sripadagalvaru which clarifies Parliament’s power to amend the

 Constitution. At the same time, looking to the use of foreign

 precedents in this judgment, Justice S.M. Sikri (as His Lordship

 then was), dealing with the interpretation of Article 368 of the

 Constitution, first of all, highlighted that:

 “No other Constitution in the world is like ours. No other
 Constitution combines under its wings such diverse
 peoples, numbering now more than 550 millions [sic], with
 different languages and religions and in different stages of
 economic development, into one nation, and no other
 nation is faced with such vast socio-economic problems.

 After this premise, however, His Lordship accepts, in order

 to define what an ‘amendment’ is according to the Indian

 Constitution, the reasoning of Lord Greene in Bidie v. General

 Accident, Fire and Life Assurance Corporation 14 and that of

 Justice Holmes in Towne v. Eisner15, which affirm that to

 understand a word it is necessary to understand the context in

 which it is inserted. To strengthen this, James v. Commonwealth

 of Australia16 is also referred to.

 We have stated the trend in brief with a purpose. Number

 of judgments of U.K. Courts, German Supreme Court, European

 Commission of Human Rights (ECHR), U.S. Supreme Court etc.

 were cited. However, there is no similarity in approach by these

14 Bidie v. General Accident, Fire and Life Assurance Corporation (1948) 2 All ER 995, 998.
15 Towne v. Eisner, 245 US 418.
16 James v. Commonwealth of Australia, (1936) AC 578.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 104 of 567
 Courts in deciding a particular issue by applying different

 principles, particularly when it comes to the issues of data

 protection and privacy. In this backdrop, it becomes necessary,

 while referring to these judgments, to keep in mind the ethos,

 cultural background and vast socio-economic problems of this

 country and on that basis to accept a particular norm, or for that

 matter, to formulate a constitutional norm which is relevant in our

 context. That is the endeavour which is made by us.

 (iv) Many arguments of the petitioners relate to the working of

 the system. The petitioners had argued that the architecture of

 Aadhaar, by its very nature, is probabilistic and, therefore, it may

 result in exclusion, in many cases. Therefore, rather than

 extending subsidies, benefits and services to the section of

 society for which these are meant, it may have the tendency to

 exclude them from receiving such subsidies, benefits and

 services. The respondents, on the other hand, have stated on

 affidavit that the attempt of the respondents would be to ensure

 that no individual who is eligible for such benefits etc. is deprived

 form receiving those benefits, even when in a particular case, it is

 found that on authentication, his fingerprints or iris are not

 matching and is resulting into failure. It was clarified that since

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 105 of 567
 Aadhaar project is an ongoing project, there may be some

 glitches in its working and there is a continuous attempt to make

 improvements in order to ensure that it becomes foolproof over a

 period of time. We have eschewed detailed discussion in respect

 of those arguments, which may not have much relevance when

 judging the constitutional validity of the Act and the scheme.

 However, such arguments of exclusion etc. leading to violation of

 Articles 14 and 21 are dealt with at an appropriate stage. But the

 argument based on alleged inaccurate claims of savings by the

 Authority/Union of India in respect of certain programmes, like

 saving of USD 11 billion per annum due to the Aadhaar project,

 as well as savings in the implementation of the MGNREGA

 scheme, LPG subsidy, PDS savings need not detain us for long.

 Such rebuttals raised by the petitioners may have relevance

 insofar as working of the Act is concerned. That by itself cannot

 be a ground to invalidate the statute.

 (v) As mentioned above, notwithstanding the passions and

 emotions evoked on both sides in equal measure, this Court has

 adopted a lambent approach while dealing with the issues raised,

 having a posture of calmness coupled with objective examination

 of the issues on the touchstone of the constitutional provisions.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 106 of 567
 We are in the age of constitutional democracy, that too

 substantive and liberal democracy. Such a democracy is not

 based solely on the rule of people through their representatives

 which is known as “formal democracy”. It also has other precepts

 like rule of law, human rights, independence of judiciary,

 separation of powers, etc. The framers of Indian Constitution

 duly recognized the aforesaid precepts of liberal and substantive

 democracy with rule of law as an important and fundamental

 pillar. At the same time, in the scheme of the Constitution, it is

 the judiciary which is assigned the role of upholding rule of law

 and protecting the Constitution and democracy.

 The essence of rule of law is to preclude arbitrary action.

 Dicey, who propounded the rule of law, gave distinct meaning to

 this concept and explained that it was based on three kindered

 features, which are as follows:

 (i) absence of arbitrary powers on the part of authorities;

 (ii) equality before law; and

 (iii) the Constitution is part of the ordinary law of the land.

 There are three aspects of the rule of law, which are as

 follows:

 (a) A formal aspect which means making the law rule.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 107 of 567
 (b) A jurisprudential or doctrinal aspect which is concerned with

 the minimal condition for the existence of law in society.

 (c) A substantive aspect as per which the rule of law is

 concerned with properly balancing between the individual and

 society.

 When we talk of jurisprudential rule of law, it includes

 certain minimum requirements without which a legal system

 cannot exist and which distinguished a legal system from an

 automatic system where the leader imposes his will on everyone

 else. Professor Lon Fuller has described these requirements

 collectively as the 'inner morality of law'. In addition to

 jurisprudential concept, which is important and an essential

 condition for the rule of law, the substantive concept of the rule of

 law is equally important and inseparable norm of the rule of law in

 real sense. It encompasses the 'right conception' of the rule of

 law propounded by Dworkin. It means guaranteeing fundamental

 values of morality, justice, and human rights, with a proper

 balance between these and the other needs of the society.

 Justice Aharon Barak, former Chief Justice of Israel, has lucidly

 explained this facet of rule of law in the following manner:

 “The rule of law is not merely public order, the rule of law is
 social justice based on public order. The law exists to
 ensure proper social life. Social life, however, is not a goal
 in itself but a means to allow the individual to live in dignity
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 108 of 567
 and develop himself. The human being and human rights
 underlie this substantive perception of the rule of law, with
 a proper balance among the different rights and between
 human rights and the proper needs of society. The
 substantive rule of law “is the rule of proper law, which
 balances the needs of society and the individual”. This is
 the rule of law that strikes a balance between society's
 need for political independence, social equality, economic
 development, and internal order, on the one hand, and the
 needs of the individual, his personal liberty, and his human
 dignity on the other. The Judge must protect this rich
 concept of the rule of law.”

 The 'rule of law', which is a fine sonorous phrase, is

 dynamic and ever expanding and can be put alongside the

 brotherhood of man, human rights and human dignity. About the

 modern rule of law, Professor Garner observed:

 “The concept in its modern dress meets a need that has
 been felt throughout the history of civilization, law is not
 sufficient in itself and it must serve some purpose. Man is
 a social animal, but to live in society he has had to fashion
 for himself and in his own interest the law and other
 instruments of government, and as a consequence those
 must to some extent limit his personal liberties. The
 problem is how to control those instruments of government
 in accordance with the Rule of Law and in the interest of
 the governed.”

 Likewise, the basic spirit of our Constitution is to provide

 each and every person of the nation equal opportunity to grow as

 a human being, irrespective of race, caste, religion, community

 and social status. Granville Austin while analyzing the functioning

 of Indian Constitution in first 50 years has described three

 distinguished strands of Indian Constitution: (i) protecting national

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 109 of 567
 unity and integrity, (ii) establishing the institution and spirit of

 democracy; and (iii) fostering social reforms. The strands are

 mutually dependent and inextricably intertwined in what he

 elegantly describes as a 'seamless web'. And there cannot be

 social reforms till it is ensured that each and every citizen of this

 country is able to exploit his/her potentials to the maximum. The

 Constitution, although drafted by the Constituent Assembly, was

 meant for the people of India and that is why it is given by the

 people to themselves as expressed in the opening words “We the

 People...”. What is the most important gift to the common person

 given by this Constitution is “fundamental rights” which may be

 called human rights as well.

 Speaking for the vision of our founding fathers, in State of

 Karnataka & Anr. v. Shri Ranganatha Reddy & Anr. 17, this Court

 speaking through Justice Krishna Iyer observed:

 “The social philosophy of the Constitution shapes creative
 judicial vision and orientation. Our nation has, as its
 dynamic doctrine, economic democracy sans which
 political democracy is chimerical. We say so because our
 Constitution, in Parts III and IV and elsewhere, ensouls
 such a value system, and the debate in this case puts
 precisely this soul in peril….Our thesis is that the dialectics
 of social justice should not be missed if the synthesis of
 Parts III and Part IV is to influence State action and court
 pronouncements. Constitutional problems cannot be
 studied in a socio-economic vacuum, since socio-cultural
 changes are the source of the new values, and sloughing
 off old legal thought is part of the process the new equity-

17 (1977) 4 SCC 471
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 110 of 567
 loaded legality. A judge is a social scientist in his role as
 constitutional invigilator and fails functionally if he forgets
 this dimension in his complex duties.”

 In Dattatraya Govind Mahajan v. State of Maharashtra18 the

 spirit of our Constitution was explained thus:

 “Our Constitution is a tryst with destiny, preamble with
 lucent solemnity in the words ‘Justice – social, economic
 and political.’ The three great branches of Government, as
 creatures of the Constitution, must remember this promise
 in their fundamental role and forget it at their peril, for to do
 so will be a betrayal of chose high values and goals which
 this nation set for itself in its objective Resolution and
 whose elaborate summation appears in Part IV of the
 Paramount Parchment. The history of our country’s
 struggle for independence was the story of a battle
 between the forces of socio-economic exploitation and the
 masses of deprived people of varying degrees and the
 Constitution sets the new sights of the nation…..Once we
 grasp the dharma of the Constitution, the new orientation of
 the karma of adjudication becomes clear. Our founding
 fathers, aware of our social realities, forged our fighting
 faith and integrating justice in its social, economic and
 political aspects. While contemplating the meaning of the
 Articles of the Organic Law, the Supreme Court shall not
 disown Social Justice.”

 In National Human Rights Commission v. State of

 Arunachal Pradesh19, the Supreme Court explained it again, as

 under:

 “We are a country governed by the Rule of Law. Our
 Constitution confers certain rights on every human being
 and certain other rights on citizens. Every person is entitled
 to equality before the law and equal protection of the laws.”

 Looking the matter from this angle, when the judiciary is

 assigned the role of upholding the rule of law, the first function of
18 (1977) 2 SCC 548
19 (1996) 1 SCC 742
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 111 of 567
 the judiciary is to protect the democracy as well as the

 Constitution. At the same time, second role of the Court, which is

 equally important, is to bridge the gap between the law and the

 society. In the process of undertaking this role, a third role, which

 is of equal significance also springs up. Judiciary is also to

 ensure that social and economic justice is meted out to the

 deserving lot by affirmative action of the State. Our attempt has

 been to strive the balancing of competing Constitutional norms.

 The complex issues are dealt with keeping in view this role of the

 Supreme Court as assigned by the Constitution; albeit within the

 constitutional norms.

Scope of Judicial Review:

73) The aforesaid discussion leads us to pick up and discuss another

 strand viz. the scope of judicial review in such matters.

74) Judicial review means the Supremacy of law. It is the power of

 the court to review the actions of the Legislature, the Executive

 and the Judiciary itself and to scrutinize the validity of any law or

 action. It has emerged as one of the most effective instruments of

 protecting and preserving the cherished freedoms in a

 constitutional democracy and upholding principles such as

 separation of powers and rule of law. The Judiciary, through

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 112 of 567
 judicial review, prevents the decisions of other branches from

 impinging on the constitutional values. The fundamental nature

 of the Constitution is that of a limiting document, it curtails the

 powers of majoritarianism from hijacking the State. The power of

 review is the shield which is placed in the hands of the most

 judiciaries of constitutional democracies to enable the protection

 of the supreme document.

75) In Binoy Viswam v. Union of India & Ors.20, scope of judicial

 review of legislative Act was described in the following manner:

 “76. Under the Constitution, Supreme Court as well as High
 Courts are vested with the power of judicial review of not
 only administrative acts of the executive but legislative
 enactments passed by the legislature as well. This power is
 given to the High Courts under Article 226 of the
 Constitution and to the Supreme Court under Article 32 as
 well as Article 136 of the Constitution. At the same time, the
 parameters on which the power of judicial review of
 administrative act is to be undertaken are different from the
 parameters on which validity of legislative enactment is to
 be examined. No doubt, in exercises of its power of judicial
 review of legislative action, the Supreme Court, or for that
 matter, the High Courts can declare law passed by
 Parliament or the State Legislature as invalid. However, the
 power to strike down primary legislation enacted by the
 Union or the State Legislatures is on limited grounds.
 Courts can strike down legislation either on the basis that it
 falls foul of federal distribution of powers or that it
 contravenes fundamental rights or other constitutional
 rights/provisions of the Constitution of India. No doubt,
 since the Supreme Court and the High Courts are treated
 as the ultimate arbiter in all matters involving interpretation
 of the Constitution, it is the courts which have the final say
 on questions relating to rights and whether such a right is
 violated or not. The basis of the aforesaid statement lies in

20 (2017) 7 SCC 59
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 113 of 567
 Article 13(2) of the Constitution which proscribes the State
 from making “any law which takes away or abridges the
 right conferred by Part III”, enshrining fundamental rights. It
 categorically states that any law made in contravention
 thereof, to the extent of the contravention, be void.

 77. We can also take note of Article 372 of the Constitution
 at this stage which applies to pre-constitutional laws. Article
 372(1) reads as under:

 “372. Continuance in force of existing laws and
 their adaptation.—(1) Notwithstanding the repeal by
 this Constitution of the enactments referred to in
 Article 395 but subject to the other provisions of this
 Constitution, all the laws in force in the territory of
 India immediately before the commencement of this
 Constitution shall continue in force therein until
 altered or repealed or amended by a competent
 legislature or other competent authority.”

 In the context of judicial review of legislation, this provision
 gives an indication that all laws enforced prior to the
 commencement of the Constitution can be tested for
 compliance with the provisions of the Constitution by
 courts. Such a power is recognised by this Court in Union
 of India v. SICOM Ltd. In that judgment, it was also held that
 since the term “laws”, as per Article 372, includes common
 law the power of judicial review of legislation, which is a
 part of common law applicable in India before the
 Constitution came into force, would continue to vest in the
 Indian courts.

 78. …These contours of the judicial review are spelled out
 in the clear terms in Rakesh Kohli, and particularly in the
 following paragraphs: (SCC pp. 321-22 & 325-27, paras
 16-17, 26-28 & 30)

 “16. The statute enacted by Parliament or a State
 Legislature cannot be declared unconstitutional
 lightly. The court must be able to hold beyond any iota
 of doubt that the violation of the constitutional
 provisions was so glaring that the legislative provision
 under challenge cannot stand. Sans flagrant violation
 of the constitutional provisions, the law made by
 Parliament or a State Legislature is not declared bad.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 114 of 567
 17. This Court has repeatedly stated that legislative
 enactment can be struck down by court only on two
 grounds, namely (i) that the appropriate legislature
 does not have the competence to make the law, and
 (ii) that it does not (sic) take away or abridge any of
 the fundamental rights enumerated in Part III of the
 Constitution or any other constitutional provisions. In
 McDowell and Co. while dealing with the challenge to
 an enactment based on Article 14, this Court stated in
 para 43 of the Report as follows: (SCC pp. 737-38)

 ‘43. … A law made by Parliament or the legislature
 can be struck down by courts on two grounds and two
 grounds alone viz. (1) lack of legislative competence,
 and (2) violation of any of the fundamental rights
 guaranteed in Part III of the Constitution or of any
 other constitutional provision. There is no third
 ground. … if an enactment is challenged as violative
 of Article 14, it can be struck down only if it is found
 that it is violative of the equality clause/equal
 protection clause enshrined therein. Similarly, if an
 enactment is challenged as violative of any of the
 fundamental rights guaranteed by sub-clauses (a) to
 (g) of Article 19(1), it can be struck down only if it is
 found not saved by any of the clauses (2) to (6) of
 Article 19 and so on. No enactment can be struck
 down by just saying that it is arbitrary or
 unreasonable. Some or the other constitutional
 infirmity has to be found before invalidating an Act. An
 enactment cannot be struck down on the ground that
 court thinks it unjustified. Parliament and the
 legislatures, composed as they are of the
 representatives of the people, are supposed to know
 and be aware of the needs of the people and what is
 good and bad for them. The court cannot sit in
 judgment over their wisdom.’

 xx xx xx

 26. In Mohd. Hanif Quareshi, the Constitution Bench
 further observed that there was always a presumption
 in favour of constitutionality of an enactment and the
 burden is upon him, who attacks it, to show that there
 has been a clear violation of the constitutional
 principles. It stated in para 15 of the Report as under:
 (AIR pp. 740-41)

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 115 of 567
 ‘15. … The courts, it is accepted, must presume that
 the legislature understands and correctly appreciates
 the needs of its own people, that its laws are directed
 to problems made manifest by experience and that its
 discriminations are based on adequate grounds. It
 must be borne in mind that the legislature is free to
 recognise degrees of harm and may confine its
 restrictions to those cases where the need is deemed
 to be the clearest and finally that in order to sustain
 the presumption of constitutionality the court may
 take into consideration matters of common
 knowledge, matters of common report, the history of
 the times and may assume every state of facts which
 can be conceived existing at the time of legislation.’

 27. The above legal position has been reiterated by a
 Constitution Bench of this Court in Mahant Moti Das
 v. S.P. Sahi.

 28. In Hamdard Dawakhana v. Union of India, inter
 alia, while referring to the earlier two decisions,
 namely, Bengal Immunity Co. Ltd. and Mahant Moti
 Das, it was observed in para 8 of the Report as
 follows: (Hamdard Dawakhana case, AIR p. 559)

 ‘8. Therefore, when the constitutionality of an
 enactment is challenged on the ground of violation of
 any of the articles in Part III of the Constitution, the
 ascertainment of its true nature and character
 becomes necessary i.e. its subject-matter, the area in
 which it is intended to operate, its purport and intent
 have to be determined. In order to do so it is
 legitimate to take into consideration all the factors
 such as history of the legislation, the purpose thereof,
 the surrounding circumstances and conditions, the
 mischief which it intended to suppress, the remedy for
 the disease which the legislature resolved to cure and
 the true reason for the remedy….’

 In Hamdard Dawakhana, the Court also followed the
 statement of law in Mahant Moti Das and the two
 earlier decisions, namely, Charanjit Lal Chowdhury v.
 Union of India and State of Bombay v. F.N. Balsara
 and reiterated the principle that presumption was
 always in favour of constitutionality of an enactment.

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 116 of 567
 xx xx xx

 30. A well-known principle that in the field of taxation,
 the legislature enjoys a greater latitude for
 classification, has been noted by this Court in a long
 line of cases. Some of these decisions are Steelworth
 Ltd. v. State of Assam [Steelworth Ltd. v. State of
 Assam, 1962 Supp (2) SCR 589], Gopal Narain v.
 State of U.P. [Gopal Narain v. State of U.P., AIR 1964
 SC 370], Ganga Sugar Corpn. Ltd. v. State of U.P.
 [Ganga Sugar Corpn. Ltd. v. State of U.P., (1980) 1
 SCC 223 : 1980 SCC (Tax) 90], R.K. Garg v. Union of
 India [R.K. Garg v. Union of India, (1981) 4 SCC 675 :
 1982 SCC (Tax) 30] and State of W.B. v. E.I.T.A.
 India Ltd. [State of W.B. v. E.I.T.A. India Ltd., (2003) 5
 SCC 239]”
 (emphasis in original)

 xx xx xx

 83. It is, thus, clear that in exercise of power of judicial
 review, the Indian courts are invested with powers to strike
 down primary legislation enacted by Parliament or the
 State Legislatures. However, while undertaking this
 exercise of judicial review, the same is to be done at three
 levels. In the first stage, the Court would examine as to
 whether impugned provision in a legislation is compatible
 with the fundamental rights or the constitutional provisions
 (substantive judicial review) or it falls foul of the federal
 distribution of powers (procedural judicial review). If it is not
 found to be so, no further exercise is needed as challenge
 would fail. On the other hand, if it is found that legislature
 lacks competence as the subject legislated was not within
 the powers assigned in the List in Schedule VII, no further
 enquiry is needed and such a law is to be declared as ultra
 vires the Constitution. However, while undertaking
 substantive judicial review, if it is found that the impugned
 provision appears to be violative of fundamental rights or
 other constitutional rights, the Court reaches the second
 stage of review. At this second phase of enquiry, the Court
 is supposed to undertake the exercise as to whether the
 impugned provision can still be saved by reading it down
 so as to bring it in conformity with the constitutional
 provisions. If that is not achievable then the enquiry enters
 the third stage. If the offending portion of the statute is
 severable, it is severed and the Court strikes down the

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 117 of 567
 impugned provision declaring the same as
 unconstitutional.”

76) In support of the aforesaid proposition that an Act of the

 Parliament can be invalidated only on the aforesaid two grounds,

 passages from various judgments were extracted 21. The Court

 also noted the observations from State of A.P. & Ors. v.

 MCDOWELL & Co. & Ors.22 wherein it was held that apart from

 the aforesaid two grounds, no third ground is available to validate

 any piece of legislation. In the process, it was further noted that

 in Rajbala & Ors. v. State of Haryana & Ors.23 (which followed

 MCDOWELL & Co. case), the Court held that a legislation cannot

 be declared unconstitutional on the ground that it is ‘arbitrary’

 inasmuch as examining as to whether a particular Act is arbitrary

 or not implies a value judgment and courts do not examine the

 wisdom of legislative choices, and, therefore, cannot undertake

 this exercise.

77) The issue whether law can be declared unconstitutional on the

 ground of arbitrariness has received the attention of this Court in

 a Constitution Bench judgment in the case of Shayara Bano v.

 Union of India & Ors.24. R.F. Nariman and U.U. Lalit, JJ.
21 State of M.P. v. Rakesh Kohli, (2012) 6 SCC 312; Ashoka Kumar Thakur v. Union of India,
 (2008) 6 SCC 1
22 (1996) 3 SCC 709
23 (2016) 2 SCC 445
24 (2017) 9 SCC 1
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 118 of 567
 discredited the ratio of the aforesaid judgments wherein the Court

 had held that a law cannot be declared unconstitutional on the

 ground that it is arbitrary. The Judges pointed out the larger

 Bench judgment in the case of Dr. K.R. Lakshmanan v. State of

 T.N. & Anr.25 and Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India & Anr.26 where

 ‘manifest arbitrariness’ is recognised as the third ground on which

 the legislative Act can be invalidated. Following discussion in this

 behalf is worthy of note:

 “87. The thread of reasonableness runs through the entire
 fundamental rights chapter. What is manifestly arbitrary is
 obviously unreasonable and being contrary to the rule of
 law, would violate Article 14. Further, there is an apparent
 contradiction in the three-Judge Bench decision in
 McDowell [State of A.P. v. McDowell and Co., (1996) 3
 SCC 709] when it is said that a constitutional challenge can
 succeed on the ground that a law is “disproportionate,
 excessive or unreasonable”, yet such challenge would fail
 on the very ground of the law being “unreasonable,
 unnecessary or unwarranted”. The arbitrariness doctrine
 when applied to legislation obviously would not involve the
 latter challenge but would only involve a law being
 disproportionate, excessive or otherwise being manifestly
 unreasonable. All the aforesaid grounds, therefore, do not
 seek to differentiate between State action in its various
 forms, all of which are interdicted if they fall foul of the
 fundamental rights guaranteed to persons and citizens in
 Part III of the Constitution.

 88. We only need to point out that even after McDowell
 [State of A.P. v. McDowell and Co., (1996) 3 SCC 709] ,
 this Court has in fact negated statutory law on the ground
 of it being arbitrary and therefore violative of Article 14 of
 the Constitution of India. In Malpe Vishwanath Acharya v.
 State of Maharashtra [Malpe Vishwanath Acharya v. State
 of Maharashtra, (1998) 2 SCC 1] , this Court held that after
 passage of time, a law can become arbitrary, and,
25 (1996) 2 SCC 226
26 (1978) 1 SCC 248
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 119 of 567
 therefore, the freezing of rents at a 1940 market value
 under the Bombay Rent Act would be arbitrary and violative
 of Article 14 of the Constitution of India (see paras 8 to 15
 and 31).

 xx xx xx

 99. However, in State of Bihar v. Bihar Distillery Ltd. [State
 of Bihar v. Bihar Distillery Ltd., (1997) 2 SCC 453] , SCC at
 para 22, in State of M.P. v. Rakesh Kohli [State of M.P. v.
 Rakesh Kohli, (2012) 6 SCC 312 : (2012) 3 SCC (Civ)
 481], SCC at paras 17 to 19, in Rajbala v. State of Haryana
 [Rajbala v. State of Haryana, (2016) 2 SCC 445], SCC at
 paras 53 to 65 and in Binoy Viswam v. Union of India
 [Binoy Viswam v. Union of India, (2017) 7 SCC 59], SCC at
 paras 80 to 82, McDowell [State of A.P. v. McDowell and
 Co., (1996) 3 SCC 709] was read as being an absolute bar
 to the use of “arbitrariness” as a tool to strike down
 legislation under Article 14. As has been noted by us earlier
 in this judgment, McDowell [State of A.P. v. McDowell and
 Co., (1996) 3 SCC 709] itself is per incuriam, not having
 noticed several judgments of Benches of equal or higher
 strength, its reasoning even otherwise being flawed. The
 judgments, following McDowell [State of A.P. v. McDowell
 and Co., (1996) 3 SCC 709] are, therefore, no longer good
 law.”

78) The historical development of the doctrine of arbitrariness has

 been noticed by the said Judges in Shayara Bano in detail. It

 would be suffice to reproduce paragraphs 67 to 69 of the said

 judgment as the discussion in these paras provide a sufficient

 guide as to how a doctrine of arbitrariness is to be applied while

 adjudging the constitutional validity of a legislation.

 “67. We now come to the development of the doctrine of
 arbitrariness and its application to State action as a distinct
 doctrine on which State action may be struck down as
 being violative of the rule of law contained in Article 14. In a
 significant passage, Bhagwati, J., in E.P. Royappa v. State
 of T.N. stated: (SCC p. 38, para 85)
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 120 of 567
 “85. The last two grounds of challenge may be taken
 up together for consideration. Though we have
 formulated the third ground of challenge as a distinct
 and separate ground, it is really in substance and
 effect merely an aspect of the second ground based
 on violation of Articles 14 and 16. Article 16 embodies
 the fundamental guarantee that there shall be
 equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters
 relating to employment or appointment to any office
 under the State. Though enacted as a distinct and
 independent fundamental right because of its great
 importance as a principle ensuring equality of
 opportunity in public employment which is so vital to
 the building up of the new classless egalitarian
 society envisaged in the Constitution, Article 16 is
 only an instance of the application of the concept of
 equality enshrined in Article 14. In other words, Article
 14 is the genus while Article 16 is a species. Article
 16 gives effect to the doctrine of equality in all matters
 relating to public employment. The basic principle
 which, therefore, informs both Articles 14 and 16 is
 equality and inhibition against discrimination. Now,
 what is the content and reach of this great equalising
 principle? It is a founding faith, to use the words of
 Bose, J., “a way of life”, and it must not be subjected
 to a narrow pedantic or lexicographic approach. We
 cannot countenance any attempt to truncate its all-
 embracing scope and meaning, for to do so would be
 to violate its activist magnitude. Equality is a dynamic
 concept with many aspects and dimensions and it
 cannot be “cribbed, cabined and confined” within
 traditional and doctrinaire limits. From a positivistic
 point of view, equality is antithetic to arbitrariness. In
 fact equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies;
 one belongs to the rule of law in a republic while the
 other, to the whim and caprice of an absolute
 monarch. Where an act is arbitrary, it is implicit in it
 that it is unequal both according to political logic and
 constitutional law and is therefore violative of Article
 14, and if it effects any matter relating to public
 employment, it is also violative of Article 16. Articles
 14 and 16 strike at arbitrariness in State action and
 ensure fairness and equality of treatment. They
 require that State action must be based on valid
 relevant principles applicable alike to all similarly
 situate and it must not be guided by any extraneous
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 121 of 567
 or irrelevant considerations because that would be
 denial of equality. Where the operative reason for
 State action, as distinguished from motive inducing
 from the antechamber of the mind, is not legitimate
 and relevant but is extraneous and outside the area
 of permissible considerations, it would amount to
 mala fide exercise of power and that is hit by Articles
 14 and 16. Mala fide exercise of power and
 arbitrariness are different lethal radiations emanating
 from the same vice: in fact the latter comprehends the
 former. Both are inhibited by Articles 14 and 16.”
 (emphasis supplied)

 68. This was further fleshed out in Maneka Gandhi v.
 Union of India, where, after stating that various
 fundamental rights must be read together and must overlap
 and fertilise each other, Bhagwati, J., further amplified this
 doctrine as follows: (SCC pp. 283-84, para 7)

 “The nature and requirement of the procedure under
 Article 21

 7. Now, the question immediately arises as to what is
 the requirement of Article 14: what is the content and
 reach of the great equalising principle enunciated in
 this article? There can be no doubt that it is a
 founding faith of the Constitution. It is indeed the pillar
 on which rests securely the foundation of our
 democratic republic. And, therefore, it must not be
 subjected to a narrow, pedantic or lexicographic
 approach. No attempt should be made to truncate its
 all-embracing scope and meaning, for to do so would
 be to violate its activist magnitude. Equality is a
 dynamic concept with many aspects and dimensions
 and it cannot be imprisoned within traditional and
 doctrinaire limits. We must reiterate here what was
 pointed out by the majority in E.P. Royappa v. State
 of T.N. , namely, that: (SCC p. 38, para 85)

 ‘85. … From a positivistic point of view, equality is
 antithetic to arbitrariness. In fact equality and
 arbitrariness are sworn enemies; one belongs to the
 rule of law in a republic, while the other, to the whim
 and caprice of an absolute monarch. Where an act is
 arbitrary, it is implicit in it that it is unequal both
 according to political logic and constitutional law and
 is therefore violative of Article 14….’
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 122 of 567
 Article 14 strikes at arbitrariness in State action and
 ensures fairness and equality of treatment. The
 principle of reasonableness, which legally as well as
 philosophically, is an essential element of equality or
 non-arbitrariness pervades Article 14 like a brooding
 omnipresence and the procedure contemplated by
 Article 21 must answer the test of reasonableness in
 order to be in conformity with Article 14. It must be
 “right and just and fair” and not arbitrary, fanciful or
 oppressive; otherwise, it would be no procedure at all
 and the requirement of Article 21 would not be
 satisfied.”
 (emphasis supplied)

 69. This was further clarified in A.L. Kalra v. Project and
 Equipment Corpn., following Royappa and holding that
 arbitrariness is a doctrine distinct from discrimination. It
 was held: (A.L. Kalra case, SCC p. 328, para 19)

 “19. … It thus appears well settled that Article 14
 strikes at arbitrariness in executive/administrative
 action because any action that is arbitrary must
 necessarily involve the negation of equality. One need
 not confine the denial of equality to a comparative
 evaluation between two persons to arrive at a
 conclusion of discriminatory treatment. An action per
 se arbitrary itself denies equal of (sic) protection by
 law. The Constitution Bench pertinently observed in
 Ajay Hasia case and put the matter beyond
 controversy when it said: (SCC p. 741, para 16)

 ‘16. … Wherever therefore, there is arbitrariness in
 State action whether it be of the legislature or of the
 executive or of an “authority” under Article 12, Article
 14 immediately springs into action and strikes down
 such State action.’

 This view was further elaborated and affirmed in D.S.
 Nakara v. Union of India . In Maneka Gandhi v. Union of
 India it was observed that Article 14 strikes at arbitrariness
 in State action and ensures fairness and equality of
 treatment. It is thus too late in the day to contend that an
 executive action shown to be arbitrary is not either judicially
 reviewable or within the reach of Article 14.”

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 123 of 567
 The same view was reiterated in Babita Prasad v. State of
 Bihar , SCC at p. 285, para 31.”

 This doctrine is, thus, treated as a facet of both Articles 14

 and 21 of the Constitution.

79) We would like to record that we have proceeded on the premise

 that manifest arbitrariness also furnishes a ground on the basis

 on which a legislative enactment can be judicially reviewed. In

 the process, even the constitutional validity of Section 139AA of

 the Income Tax Act, 1961 is given a fresh look on the touchstone

 of this norm.

Explaining the doctrine/principles on which the cases are to be
decided:

80) Our discussion up to this stage, which gives a glimpse of the

 attack to the Aadhaar scheme and the Aadhaar Act, spearheaded

 by the petitioners, would reveal that in the forefront is the right to

 privacy and that forms the main pillar on which the edifice of

 arguments is substantially constructed 27. Inbuilt in this right to

 privacy is the right to live with dignity, which is a postulate of right

 to privacy. In the process, discussion leads to the issue of

 proportionality, viz. whether measures taken under the Aadhaar

 Act satisfy the doctrine of proportionality. We would, therefore,
27 There are few other incidental and ancillary issues raised by the petitioners as well, which we
 propose to discuss and deal with after answering these fundamental submissions.
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 124 of 567
 be well advised to explain these concepts, so that their

 application to the fact situation is undertaken with clear and

 stable norms in mind.

Contours of Right to Privacy:

81) It stands established, with conclusive determination of the nine

 Judge Bench judgment of this Court in K.S. Puttaswamy that right

 to privacy is a fundamental right. The majority judgment authored

 by Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J. (on behalf of three other Judges) and

 five concurring judgments of other five Judges have declared, in

 no uncertain terms and most authoritatively, right to privacy to be

 a fundamental right. This judgment also discusses in detail the

 scope and ambit of right to privacy. The relevant passages in this

 behalf have been reproduced above while taking note of the

 submissions of the learned counsel for the petitioners as well as

 respondents. One interesting phenomenon that is discerned from

 the respective submissions on either side is that both sides have

 placed strong reliance on different passages from this very

 judgment to support their respective stances. A close reading of

 this judgment brings about the following features:

 (i) Privacy has always been a natural right: The correct

 position in this behalf has been established by a number of

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 125 of 567
 judgments starting from Gobind v. State of M.P.28 Various

 opinions conclude that:

 (a) privacy is a concomitant of the right of the individual to

 exercise control over his or her personality.

 (b) Privacy is the necessary condition precedent to the

 enjoyment of any of the guarantees in Part III.

 (c) The fundamental right to privacy would cover at least three

 aspects – (i) intrusion with an individual’s physical body, (ii)

 informational privacy, and (iii) privacy of choice.

 (d) One aspect of privacy is the right to control the

 dissemination of personal information. And that every individual

 should have a right to be able to control exercise over his/her own

 life and image as portrayed in the world and to control

 commercial use of his/her identity.

 Following passages from different opinions reflect the

 aforesaid proposition:

 Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J.:

 42. Privacy is a concomitant of the right of the individual to
 exercise control over his or her personality. It finds an
 origin in the notion that there are certain rights which are
 natural to or inherent in a human being. Natural rights are
 inalienable because they are inseparable from the human
 personality. The human element in life is impossible to
 conceive without the existence of natural rights. In 1690,
 John Lockehad in his Second Treatise of Government
 observed that the lives, liberties and estates of individuals

28 (1975) 2 SCC 148
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 126 of 567
 are as a matter of fundamental natural law, a private
 preserve. The idea of a private preserve was to create
 barriers from outside interference. In 1765, William
 Blackstone in his Commentaries on the Laws of England
 spoke of a “natural liberty”. There were, in his view,
 absolute rights which were vested in the individual by the
 immutable laws of nature. These absolute rights were
 divided into rights of personal security, personal liberty and
 property. The right of personal security involved a legal and
 uninterrupted enjoyment of life, limbs, body, health and
 reputation by an individual.

 xx xx xx

 46. Natural rights are not bestowed by the State. They
 inhere in human beings because they are human. They
 exist equally in the individual irrespective of class or strata,
 gender or orientation.

 xx xx xx

 318. Life and personal liberty are inalienable rights. These
 are rights which are inseparable from a dignified human
 existence. The dignity of the individual, equality between
 human beings and the quest for liberty are the foundational
 pillars of the Indian Constitution.

 S.A. Bobde, J. :

 415. Therefore, privacy is the necessary condition
 precedent to the enjoyment of any of the guarantees in
 Part III. As a result, when it is claimed by rights bearers
 before constitutional courts, a right to privacy may be
 situated not only in Article 21, but also simultaneously in
 any of the other guarantees in Part III. In the current state
 of things, Articles 19(1), 20(3), 25, 28 and 29 are all rights
 helped up and made meaningful by the exercise of privacy.
 This is not an exhaustive list. Future developments in
 technology and social ordering may well reveal that there
 are yet more constitutional sites in which a privacy right
 inheres that are not at present evident to us.

 R.F. Nariman, J. :

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 127 of 567
 521. In the Indian context, a fundamental right to privacy
 would cover at least the following three aspects:

  Privacy that involves the person i.e. when there is
 some invasion by the State of a person's rights
 relatable to his physical body, such as the right to
 move freely;
  Informational privacy which does not deal with a
 person's body but deals with a person's mind, and
 therefore recognises that an individual may have
 control over the dissemination of material that is
 personal to him. Unauthorised use of such
 information may, therefore lead to infringement of
 this right; and
  The privacy of choice, which protects an individual's
 autonomy over fundamental personal choices.

 For instance, we can ground physical privacy or privacy
 relating to the body in Articles 19(1)(d) and (e) read with
 Article 21; ground personal information privacy under
 Article 21; and the privacy of choice in Articles 19(1)(a) to
 (c), 20(3), 21 and 25. The argument based on “privacy”
 being a vague and nebulous concept need not, therefore,
 detain us.

 xx xx xx

 532. The learned counsel for the petitioners also referred to
 another important aspect of the right to privacy. According
 to the learned counsel for the petitioner this right is a
 natural law right which is inalienable. Indeed, the reference
 order itself, in para 12, refers to this aspect of the
 fundamental right contained. It was, therefore, argued
 before us that given the international conventions referred
 to hereinabove and the fact that this right inheres in every
 individual by virtue of his being a human being, such right
 is not conferred by the Constitution but is only recognised
 and given the status of being fundamental. There is no
 doubt that the petitioners are correct in this submission.
 However, one important roadblock in the way needs to be
 got over.

 533. In ADM, Jabalpur v. Shivakant Shukla, a Constitution
 Bench of this Court arrived at the conclusion (by majority)
 that Article 21 is the sole repository of all rights to life and
 personal liberty, and, when suspended, takes away those

Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 128 of 567
 rights altogether. A remarkable dissent was that of Khanna,
 J. [ Khanna, J. was in line to be Chief Justice of India but
 was superseded because of this dissenting judgment. Nani
 Palkhivala in an article written on this great Judge's
 supersession ended with a poignant sentence, “To the
 stature of such a man, the Chief Justiceship of India can
 add nothing.” Seervai, in his monumental treatise
 Constitutional Law of India had this to say:“53. If in this
 Appendix the dissenting judgment of Khanna, J. has not
 been considered in detail, it is not for lack of admiration for
 the judgment, or the courage which he showed in
 delivering it regardless of the cost and consequences to
 himself. It cost him the Chief Justiceship of India, but it
 gained for him universal esteem not only for his courage
 but also for his inflexible judicial independence. If his
 judgment is not considered in detail it is because under the
 theory of precedents which we have adopted, a dissenting
 judgment, however valuable, does not lay down the law
 and the object of a critical examination of the majority
 judgments in this Appendix was to show that those
 judgments are untenable in law, productive of grave public
 mischief and ought to be overruled at the earliest
 opportunity. The conclusion which Justice Khanna has
 reached on the effect of the suspension of Article 21 is
 correct. His reminder that the rule of law did not merely
 mean giving effect to an enacted law was timely, and was
 reinforced by his reference to the mass murders of millions
 of Jews in Nazi concentration camps under an enacted law.
 However, the legal analysis in this Chapter confirms his
 conclusion though on different grounds from those which
 he has given.” (at Appendix p. 2229).] The learned Judge
 held: (SCC pp. 747 & 751, paras 525 & 531)

 “525. The effect of the suspension of the right to
 move any court for the enforcement of the right
 conferred by Article 21, in my opinion, is that when a
 petition is filed in a court, the court would have to
 proceed upon the basis that no reliance can be
 placed upon that article for obtaining relief from the
 court during the period of emergency. Question then
 arises as to whether the rule that no one shall be
 deprived of his life or personal liberty without the
 authority of law still survives during the period of
 emergency despite the Presidential Order suspending
 the right to move any court for the enforcement of the
 right contained in Article 21. The answer to this
 question is linked with the answer to the question as
Writ Petition (Civil) No. 494 of 2012 & connected matters Page 129 of 567
 to whether Article 21 is the sole repository of the right
 to life and personal liberty. After giving the matter my
 earnest consideration, I am of the opinion that Article
 21 cannot be considered to be the sole repository of
 the right to life and personal liberty. The right to life
 and personal liberty is the most precious right of
 human beings in civilised societies governed by the
 rule of law. Many modern Constitutions incorporate
 certain fundamental rights, including the one relating
 to personal freedom. According to Blackstone, the
 absolute rights of Englishmen were the rights of
 personal security, personal liberty and private
 property. The American Declaration of Independence
 (1776) states that all men are created equal, and
 among their inalienable rights are life, liberty, and the
 pursuit of happiness. The Second Amendment to the
 US Constitution refers inter alia to security of person,
 while the Fifth Amendment prohibits inter alia
 deprivation of life and liberty without due process, of
 law. The different Declarations of Human Rights and
 fundamental freedoms have all laid stress upon the
 sanctity of life and liberty. They have also given
 expression in varying words to the principle that no
 one shall be derived of his life or liberty without the
 authority of law. The International Commission of
 Jurists, which is affiliated to UNESCO, has been
 attempting with, considerable success to give
 material content to “the rule of law”, an expression
 used in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
 One of its most notable achievements was the
 Declaration of Delhi, 1959. This resulted from a
 Congress held in New Delhi attended by jurists from
 more than 50 countries, and was based on a
 questionnaire circulated to 75,000 lawyers. “Respect
 for the supreme value of human personality” was
 stated to be the basis of all law (see p. 21 of the
 Constitutional and Administrative Law by O. Hood
 Phillips, 3rd Edn.).

 xx xx xx

[Excerpt truncated - this is one of the longest judgments in Indian legal history (multiple separate opinions across a 13/5-judge bench); full text available at indiankanoon.org]